LEAD: Vice President Bush and Michael S. Dukakis clashed sharply and at times angrily last night, with Mr. Dukakis relentlessly pressing the Iran-contra affair and drug policy and Mr. Bush criticizing Mr. Dukakis's stands on military issues, the death penalty and taxes.

Vice President Bush and Michael S. Dukakis clashed sharply and at times angrily last night, with Mr. Dukakis relentlessly pressing the Iran-contra affair and drug policy and Mr. Bush criticizing Mr. Dukakis's stands on military issues, the death penalty and taxes.

In the first of two Presidential debates scheduled for the general election campaign, the Vice President argued repeatedly that the Massachusetts Governor lacked Mr. Bush's own experience, and assailed his judgment as shaped by failed liberal policies.

Mr. Dukakis, on the other hand, attacked Mr. Bush as the inheritor of an Administration that was uncaring on social issues and said that, while Mr. Bush had a long resume of government service, he had demonstrated flawed judgment in the Iran-contra affair, in dealings with Panama's military leader and on other issues ranging from health care to military policy. Some Clear Distinctions

At several points in their nationally televised 90-minute encounter, which took place at Wait Chapel on the campus of Wake Forest University in Winston-Salem, N.C., the nominees offered g clear picture of their disagreements on issues and values. [ Transcript, page A16. ] For instance, whereas Mr. Bush passionately defended ''the sanctity of life,'' Mr. Dukakis said the Vice President would ''brand a woman a criminal'' for choosing abortion.

Mr. Dukakis set the tone for his approach to the debate by going on the attack within three minutes of its start.

He did so by criticizing the Reagan Administration's dealings with Gen. Manuel Antonio Noriega, the Panamanian ruler, who has been indicted by two Federal grand juries in Florida on charges related to narcotics trafficking.

''I want to be a President of the United States who makes sure that we never again do business with a drug-running Panamanian dictator,'' the Governor declared. Competing Assessments

Mr. Bush's aides later conceded that the Governor had turned in a forceful performance but argued that he had displayed the liberal qualities that they felt they could use against him later in the campaign. By and large, the Bush aides did not praise their own candidate's performance, instead seeking to to raise doubts about Mr. Dukakis's. The Dukakis side, meanwhile, said its man had fared much better than the Vice President.

Adopting a goading tone, Mr. Dukakis referred to the Vice President early on as ''George'' and, at another point, simply as ''Bush,'' and he returned repeatedly to Administration drug policy and to the sale of American arms to Iran and the subsequent secret diversion of some proceeds to the Nicaraguan rebels.

For his part, Mr. Bush denounced Mr. Dukakis as a ''a strong liberal Democrat'' - the Vice President spoke the word ''liberal'' at least seven times in an hour and a half - who would return the nation to the ''malaise'' and high interest rates of the Carter years.

Mr. Bush, who has said that as President he would ''never'' seek to increase taxes, declared that the Governor had raised them in Massachusetts ''five different times.'' And, attempting to portray Mr. Dukakis as too liberal on another issue, he noted that he, unlike the Governor, favored the death penalty for certain crimes.

''When a narcotics-wrapped-up guy goes in and murders a police officer,'' the Vice President said, ''I think they ought to pay with their life.'' Defender of Reagan

The Republican nominee also accepted his role as a defender of President Reagan's policies. ''I will take all the blame for those two incidences,'' he said, referring to policies on Panama and Iran, ''if you give me half the credit for all of the good things that have happened in world peace since Ronald Reagan and I took over from the Carter Administration.''

Each nominee focused on the questions he hopes will prove paramount in the mind of an electorate that had seemed to suspend judgment while waiting for the debate. Mr. Dukakis focused on leadership and middle-class concerns, Mr. Bush on experience and values.

The two contenders stuck closely to carefully rehearsed phrases, regardless of the questions they were asked, and their closing comments included phrases that each had used for months.

Using words intended to evoke memories of John F. Kennedy's call on America to ''do better,'' Mr. Dukakis declared, ''The best America is not behind us, the best America is yet to come.''

Mr. Bush took many cues throughout the debate from his successful acceptance speech before the Republican National Convention last month and closed by saying that voters should ask which candidate had the values, the experience, the integrity and the stability they would rely on.

''My fellow Americans,'' Mr. Bush answered, ''I am that man, and I ask for your support.'' Crucial Event for Dukakis

The debate, before a television audience that may have exceeded 100 million people, was especially crucial to Mr. Dukakis, who has trailed in the polls since the Republican convention and remains much less well known than Mr. Bush. The Governor's aides said he had intended to use the debate to give his campaign a new start, and gleeful Democrats said afterward that he had done so.

But Mr. Bush's aides, pleased that the Vice President had appeared relaxed after a slightly nervous beginning, also proclaimed victory and said Mr. Dukakis, despite his vigor, had only reinforced his image as a liberal.

Mr. Bush, criticizing Mr. Dukakis once again for vetoing a bill that would have required teachers to lead students in the Pledge of Allegiance in Massachusetts schools, said he was attacking the Governor's judgment, not his patriotism.

''Of course the Vice President is questioning my patriotism,'' Mr. Dukakis retorted. ''I don't think there is any question about that. And I resent it. I resent it.''

The exchange reflected the often angry tone of a debate between two men who seemed to dislike each other. At one point, discussing the Vice President's approach to the Federal budget deficit and his pledge not to raise taxes while instituting some new programs, Mr. Dukakis compared Mr. Bush to the character in a popular television commercial who lies repeatedly and oulandishly.

''If he keeps this up,'' Mr. Dukakis said, ''he's going to be the Joe Isuzu of American politics.''

Mr. Bush responded: ''Is this the time to unleash our one-liners? That answer was about as clear as Boston Harbor'' - a reminder of the Vice President's criticism of Mr. Dukakis on the pollution issue in Massachusetts. Dispute Over Quayle

Mr. Bush showed some anger when the discussion turned to his choice of Senator Dan Quayle of Indiana as his running mate.

Mr. Bush vigorously defended Mr. Quayle, saying the Senator had been the victim of ''a lot of rumors and innuendo.''

''He's kept his head up, and he's doing very, very well,'' said Mr. Bush, who upbraided Mr. Dukakis for referring to the Senator as ''J. Danforth Quayle.''

''Ridiculing a person's name is beneath this process,'' Mr. Bush said.

Mr. Dukakis, however, said, ''I doubt very much that Dan Quayle was the best-qualified person'' Mr. Bush could have chosen. ''I think for most people the notion 'President Quayle' is a very, very troubling notion tonight.''

Later, in speaking to reporters in the driveway of his home in McLean, Va., Mr. Quayle did not respond directly, but said that he had been victimized by ''rumors'' and ''inaccuracies'' and that ''when the American people come to know Dan Quayle - and they'll know me better in the days and weeks to come - they will feel much more comfortable with me.'' First Question: On Drugs

Going into the debate, Mr. Dukakis clearly intended to draw the nation's attention to the drug issue and the Iran-contra scandal, two matters that have faded in the public's mind in recent months, to the Democratic nominee's detriment.

He got his opportunity on the very first question, which was about the drug issue.

''I want to be a President of the United States who makes sure that we never again do business with a drug-running Panamanian dictator,'' Mr. Dukakis said, ''that we never again funnel aid to the contras who are convicted drug dealers.''

Mr. Bush replied that it was the Reagan Administration that had brought about the indictment of General Noriega. ''Seven Administrations were dealing with Mr. Noriega,'' Mr. Bush said. ''It was the Reagan-Bush Administration that brought this man to justice.''

While neither candidate made any fresh proposals of his own, each found at least one new charge to level against the other.

Mr. Dukakis, who has proposed a plan requiring employers to provide health insurance for their workers who have none, noted that Mr. Bush had referred to it as ''socialized medicine.''

Mr. Dukakis then asked the Vice President if he remembered another occasion when he had used the phrase. The Governor answered his own question, saying Mr. Bush had so characterized the Medicare program in 1964. Mr. Bush grinned.

''He was wrong then,'' Mr. Dukakis said, ''and he's wrong now.''

Mr. Bush, in turn, criticized Mr. Dukakis for supporting a bill passed in the Massachusetts Legislature two decades ago, when Mr. Dukakis was a state legislator. The bill sought to dissociate Massachusetts from the Vietnam War and asserted that the state's residents were not obliged to serve in Vietnam, since war had not been declared by Congress. Liberalism on Agenda

To encourage arguments over liberalism and its meaning was at the top of Mr. Bush's agenda for the evening, and he vigorously defended his campaign's characterization of Mr. Dukakis as ''a card-carrying member'' of the American Civil Liberties Union.

''He has every right to exercise his passion as a strong progressive liberal,'' Mr. Bush said. ''I think I'm more in touch with the mainstream of America.''

The two men clashed on military policy, with the argument revolving around whether Mr. Dukakis supported too few military systems and Mr. Bush too many.

Mr. Dukakis contended that Mr. Bush ''wants to spend billions and trillions on Star Wars'' and that such spending would imperil the United States' conventional forces.

Mr. Bush, meanwhile, said that Mr. Dukakis would cut strategic military systems before negotiating such reductions with the Soviet Union and that the United States would thus ''give away a couple of aces in that very tough card game.''

Mr. Dukakis charged that the Reagan Administration had ''cut and slashed and butchered Federal programs for the poor.''

The Governor then made fun of the vagueness of Mr. Bush's promises to the poverty-stricken. Commenting on Mr. Bush's reference to ''a thousand points of light'' as a solution to the problems of the needy, he said, ''I don't know what that means.''

Mr. Bush explained that the phrase, drawn from his acceptance speech at the Republican convention, referred to the work of voluntary associations throughout the country, and declared that Mr. Dukakis's failure to understand him was another sign of the Governor's liberalism. Attack on Iran-Contra

Mr. Dukakis was firm in his criticism of the Administration's sale of arms to Iran. ''You cannot make concessions to terrorists, ever, ever,'' he said. ''That's the tragedy of the Iran-contra scandal.''

Mr. Bush at first seemed shaken by the attack and took some time to formulate his response. ''Yes, we shouldn't trade arms for hostages,'' he said.

Then, regaining his stride, the Vice President went on the attack again, saying Mr. Dukakis had failed to express support for the American air raid on Libya two and a half years ago in retaliation for terrorism. As Mr. Bush spoke, Mr. Dukakis said, ''That's not true, that's not true.''

Mr. Dukakis has said in the past that he was opposed not to the raid per se but only to what he saw as its underlying goal of killing the Libyan leader, Col Muammar el-Qaddafi.
