Ronald Reagan and John B. Anderson disagreed tonight on abortion, tax cuts, energy policy, the mobile missile and how to revitalize American cities in the first debate of the 1980 Presidential campaign but made only intermittent attacks on President Carter, who chose not to participate.

The sharpest criticism of the President came in Mr. Anderson's response to the

Debate transcript, pages B6 and B7. opening question on how to combat inflation. He condemned ''the poor rate of performance over the last four years'' and declared that ''the man who should be here tonight to answer those questions chose not to attend.'' Later, Mr. Reagan suggested that both he and Mr. Anderson differed with ''the man who wasn't here'' on military policy.

The Reagan-Anderson confrontation had all the trappings of a fullfledged Presidential debate except for the President, who had insisted that his first appearance this year be with Mr. Reagan alone. Mr. Carter flew back to the White House from Camp David late today in time to watch the debate.

Reaching Out to National Audience

The 60-minute debate at the Baltimore Convention Center, sponsored by the League of Women Voters, was undramatic and controlled. There were no real displays of emotion and neither man made any major gaffes. Both participants used the opportunity to reach a national television audience to reinforce their own messages. Partisans of both advanced claims of victory afterward and contended that ''Jimmy Carter was the real loser'' for skipping the debate.

Both men showed more emotion and sharper disagreement on a final question involving abortion than on other issues. ''I notice that everybody who's for abortion has already been born,'' Mr. Reagan commented, and Mr. Anderson retorted that the Californian's advocacy of a constitutional ban on abortion violated the principle of ''freedom of choice.''

Mr. Anderson, at pains to project a difference between himself and Mr. Reagan, commented in his final summation that the two men had ''disagreed on every other issue'' except their common opposition to a peacetime draft.

Marked Contrast in Philosophies

Yet though the two men did not clash sharply, the debate showed a marked contrast in the philosophies of the conservative former Governor of California who has long urged a reduced Government role in American life, and Mr. Anderson, the 10-term Illinois Congressman, who has drawn a more liberal following for his independent Presidential candidacy.

On aid to the cities, Mr. Anderson advocated several multibillion dollar programs to provide for jobs and rebuilding housing and essential services, while Mr. Reagan proposd tax incentives to the private sector to attract industry and renewing rundown housing by turning it over to private owners for $1 per building.

On defense, Mr. Anderson ridiculed the mobile missile program, which is backed both by Mr. Carter and Mr. Reagan, as a ''costly boondoggle'' that would cost more than $100 billion.

Charges Traded on Taxes

And, opposing tax cuts advocated by both the Democratic and Republican contenders, he said these would ''simply be irresponsible'' and charged his rivals with virtually trying to buy votes.

''You, dear voter, are out there on the auction block,'' Mr. Anderson said. In retort, Mr. Reagan argued that Mr. Anderson's advocacy of a 50-cent-a-gallon tax on gasoline was inflationary and that the only way to curb Federal spending was to reduce taxes, forcing a cutback, the same way a parent would cut a son's allowance to make him trim his spending.

Neither man attacked President Carter as sharply as had been expected. They largely let the President's absence speak for itself, preferring to put forward their own themes - Mr. Anderson striving to emphasize his differences with the others, and Mr. Reagan stressing his record as Governor of California.

Their carefully controlled approach left the drama of Presidential debates to the next round, if there is to be any, for Mr. Carter has steadfastly refused to start debating unless his first appearance is with Mr. Reagan alone. He preferred taking public criticism for not appearing on the belief that appearing with Mr. Anderson would add legitimacy to the independent's candidacy and help him cut into the Carter vote among Democrats and independents.

In the first question, the candidates were asked what ''politically unpopular measures'' they would support to reduce inflation. They used their responses to reiterate their basic positions on the economy.

Mr. Anderson, who was selected by a coin toss to answer first, declared that an election-year tax cut, as proposed by Mr. Reagan and President Carter, would be ''irresponsible.'' He suggested revising the way the cost of living is calculated in figuring Government retirement benefits and proposed placing an emergency excise tax on gasoline. The money raised by the gasoline tax, Mr. Anderson said, should be returned to consumers in the form of lower taxes.

Mr. Reagan said that he did support a tax reduction, phased in over three years, that would lower taxes for individuals and businesses. He said that he opposed a gasoline tax on the ground that it made no sense to ''take it in the first place if you're going to give it back.''

The candidates were then asked what changes they would encourage or require in lifestyles and consumption patterns to meet the problems of dwindling supplies of energy and other resources.

The Need for Conservation

''Conservation is worthy in and of itself,'' Mr. Reagan replied. ''But I do not believe conservation alone is the answer to the present energy problem.'' Saying that by conserving resources ''all you're doing is staving off the time when you come to the end of the energy supply,'' Mr. Reagan reiterated a standard campaign theme.

''It is Government with its own restrictions and regulations that is creating the energy crisis,'' he said. ''We are an energy-rich nation.''

Mr. Anderson disagreed, declaring that Mr. Reagan ''once again has demonstrated his total misunderstanding of the energy crisis'' and asserting that the nation will have to ''create a new conservation ethic.'' He reiterated his own proposal of an emergency excise tax on gasoline to encourage conservation, along with the possible approaches of car pooling, better community transportation systems, the retrofitting and redesign of homes and commercial structures to save energy. ''We will have to change in a very appreciable way some of the lifestyles we now enjoy,'' Mr. Anderson said.

In rebuttal, Mr. Reagan maintained that ''my figures are the figures of the Department of Energy,'' and said that ''the American people haven't been doing badly'' in conserving energy.

Stands on Military Issues

A question on whether the volunteer army should be ended provided one of the evening's points of agreement. Both candidates reiterated their opposition to a military draft, and said that the armed services were having difficulty meeting manpower quotas because pay scales were too low.

''We simply have failed to keep pace with the cost of living,'' Mr. Anderson said, citing figures that he said indicated that servicemen's salaries have increased by 15 percent less than the inflation rate since the draft was abandoned in the mid-1970's.

Picking up the same point, Mr. Reagan complained that a member of the armed forces working 100 hours a week on complicated weapons systems earned less than someone in ''one of the most menial jobs working 40 hours a week here at home.'' What is needed for the military, he said, is ''a pay scale that's commensurate with the sacrifice we're asking of them.''

Given their agreement, Mr. Anderson appeared to go out of his way in his rebuttal to accentuate his differences with the Californian. Unlike Mr. Reagan, he said, he was opposed to ''a boondoggle like the MX missile.'' In turn, the Republican nominee asserted, ''I believe in that missile,'' and said it was necessary to maintain a strategic balance with the Soviet Union.

Strategies to Aid Cities

The candidates were asked next what they would do to help the nation's cities. Mr. Reagan declared that the main problem of the cities was that the Government dictated how Federal grants should be spent. Mr. Reagan said that he would permit the cities to use the money as they thought best. He also proposed tax incentives to businesses that locate in distressed areas and offered a plan for selling surplus Government property cheaply to individuals who would fix it up and live there.

Mr. Anderson, saying that cities were in worse shape than they had ever been, said he would put $4 billion in a trust fund to help cities rebuild their streets, water mains and other structures. He would spend another $4 billion, he said, on other urban programs, with the money coming from the excise taxes now levied on alcohol and tobacco.

''Where has the private sector been, Governor Reagan, during the years that our cities have been deteriorating?'' he asked.

Cost of Proposals on Inflation

The candidates were asked whether they would be willing to publish a specific forecast within two weeks detailing the impact of their proposals on inflation over five years. Mr. Anderson responded, ''I would be very happy to accept the challenge to tell voters exactly what I think it's going to cost,'' He said that his programs ''are far less inflationary than those of Governor Reagan,'' and recalled the attacks made on various Reagan proposals by George Bush in the Republican primaries, when Mr. Bush termed Mr. Reagan's programs ''voodoo economics.''

Asked whether he would publish such a forecast, Mr. Reagan replied, ''I don't have to. I've done it.'' He cited a projection recently released by the Reagan campaign, showing the cost of a variety of Mr. Reagan's proposals and projecting a balanced budget by 1982 or 1983, and said his own record as Governor of California showed his ability to reduce unemployment and inflation.

Mr. Anderson disputed Mr. Reagan's assessment, saying that Government spending in California rose from $4.6 billion to $10.2 billion in Mr. Reagan's eight years in office.

Mr. Reagan accused Mr. Anderson of having ''made up some very interesting figures,'' and said that he had indeed factored into his projections increases in military spending. In California, he said, ''We did cut increases in spending in half.'' Mr. Reagan added, ''John doesn't quite realize; he's never held an executive position.''

Candidate's Religious Views

The final question dealt with the candidates' religious views. More particularly, they were asked about the appeal issued last week by Humberto Cardinal Medeiros of Boston calling on voters to reject candidates who support a woman's right to have an abortion.

Mr. Reagan declined to comment directly on the Cardinal's stand, but he said that there was ''a great hunger in America for a spiritual revival, in a belief that law must be based on a higher law.'' Too often, he said, church leaders have been ''reluctant to speak up on what is wrong with government,'' and he added that no one should be denied the right to express an opinion.

In reply, Mr. Anderson said the principle of separation of church and state was violated when a religious leader attempted to tell ''a parishioner of any church how they should vote or who they should vote for.''

Along that line, Mr. Anderson repeated his opposition to an amendment supported by the Republican platform, one to outlaw abortions in most instances. A few moments earlier, Mr. Reagan had dryly observed that ''everyone who's for abortion has already been born.'' To this, Mr. Anderson replied that he believed ''an unborn child has to be wanted'' and that an amendment such as that favored by the Republican nominee would interfere with a woman's right to free choice.

Contrast in Final Statements

Mr. Anderson also was reminded by his questioner that three times in the 1960's he had proposed a constitutional amendment declaring that the country was based on principles established by Jesus Christ. Once again, the Illinois Congressman disavowed those efforts, calling them ''a mistake.''

There was a contrast in the way the two candidates used the three minutes they were allotted for closing statements. Mr. Reagan spoke with some passion of his view of America as a land of destiny created ''by some divine plan.'' He said the nation was confronted with ''horrendous problems,'' but he added they could be met and should not be answered with ''retreat.''

Mr. Anderson employed his time to defend his independent candidacy. He is not a ''spoiler,'' he declared, but rather the best candidate to deal with the economy, the military and the other problems of the country.

Originally, the League of Women voters had planned to put an empty chair on stage for President Carter to emphasize his absence, but later gave up that idea. Mr. Reagan and Mr. Anderson each had a light-paneled lectern and a high-back chair. Against a backdrop of blue draperies, they faced the moderator, Bill Moyers, the public television commentator, and a panel of six journalists.

Their questioners were Charles Corddry, military affairs reporter for the Baltimore Sun; Soma Golden, an editorial writer for The New York Times; Daniel Greenberg, a syndicated columnist; Carol Loomis, a member of the Board of Editors for Fortune Magazine; Lee May, a reporter for The Los Angeles Times; and Jane Bryant Quinn, a columnist for Newsweek magazine.
