Senator John Kerry argued last night that President Bush had made a "colossal error of judgment" in invading Iraq, while Mr. Bush belittled Mr. Kerry as a weak leader who would embolden the United States' foes, as the two men offered starkly different views of the war that has dominated this campaign.

For 90 minutes in their first face-to-face encounter, standing before a hushed audience on a vast stage in Coral Gables, Fla., Mr. Bush and Mr. Kerry quarreled about how to deal with the rising nuclear threat in North Korea, the justification for taking the nation into a pre-emptive war and the extent to which the United States should be prepared to intervene militarily to end what both men described as genocide in Darfur, Sudan.

But most of all, Mr. Bush and Mr. Kerry argued over the war in Iraq -- over Mr. Bush's original justification for beginning the invasion when he did, over his handling of the war now and over what the United States needs to do to extricate itself.

Mr. Kerry, while stopping short of making a promise, said that it might be possible to begin bringing troops home under his leadership in six months. Mr. Bush was less specific, stressing the need for Iraq to stabilize and to train its own security forces before American troops could come back home.

"I've made some tough decisions," Mr. Bush said in a refrain he repeated throughout the evening. "But people know where I stand. People out there listening know what I believe, and that's how best it is to keep the peace." [Transcript, Page A20.]

Mr. Kerry denounced the way the issue of the president had taken the country to war, saying he had failed to rally international support for the invasion or plan for what would come after Saddam Hussein was toppled.

"I'll never give a veto to any country over our security," Mr. Kerry said. "But I also know how to lead those alliances. This president has left them in shatters across the globe, and we're now 90 percent of the casualties in Iraq and 90 percent of the costs."

The debate took place on a day of international bloodshed -- with bombings in Baghdad and the Gaza Strip, a military incursion into Samarra in the Sunni triangle in Iraq -- that, along with the intense security in Coral Gables, offered a graphic reminder of the difficult future faced by the man who wins the election.

In the hours leading up to the debate, television images of aides to Mr. Bush and Mr. Kerry was mixed with images of corpses and bloody children from Baghdad.

The debate, at the basketball arena of the University of Miami campus, was held under stiff rules agreed to by both sides, intended to limit exchanges between the candidates, as well as camera shots showing reactions of each man as his opponent spoke.

But the rules were discarded -- both by the candidates and the networks -- almost as soon as the 90-minute debate began. Mr. Bush jumped in and asked for time for an additional rebuttal as Mr. Kerry started pummeling him for his handling of the war, a topic that took up the first 70 minutes of the debate.

And for much of the debate, television networks showed a split screen, displaying Mr. Bush often scowling and grimacing as Mr. Kerry challenged his management of the war.

When Mr. Bush was asked whether Mr. Kerry had character issues that should prevent him from becoming president, he sighed loudly as he referred to that as "a loaded question."

After praising Mr. Kerry's military service, his 20 years in the Senate -- "though I'm not so sure I admire his record" -- Mr. Bush highlighted what he called Mr. Kerry's changing position on Iraq, as he sought to underline what has been a continuing effort by his campaign to portray Mr. Kerry as inconsistent.

"We can change tactics when we need to, but we never change our beliefs," Mr. Bush said.

Mr. Kerry declared that Mr. Bush's certainty had undercut his performance as president.

"It's one thing to be certain, but you can be certain and you can be wrong," he said, adding, "Certainty sometimes gets you into trouble."

At one point, Mr. Bush said that he had gone to war in Iraq because "the enemy attacked us, Jim, and I have a solemn duty to protect the American people, to do everything I can to protect us."

A moment later, Mr. Kerry said: "The president just said something extraordinarily revealing and, frankly, very important in this debate. In answer to your question about Iraq and sending people into Iraq, he just said the enemy attacked us. Saddam Hussein didn't attack us. Osama bin Laden attacked us. Al Qaeda attacked us."

Mr. Bush looked sternly at Mr. Kerry and motioned that he wanted a chance to respond.

"Of course I know Osama bin Laden attacked us -- I know that," he said, adding: "To think that another round of resolutions would have caused Saddam Hussein to disarm, disclose, is ludicrous, in my judgment. It just shows a significant difference of opinion. We tried diplomacy. We did our best."

Mr. Bush repeatedly pointed to Mr. Kerry's original vote authorizing the president to use force in Iraq as evidence that he was an inconsistent leader who was making decisions based on the exigencies of politics, rather than on principle. And he said that Mr. Kerry's criticism had disheartened troops in the field and allies abroad.

"The only thing consistent about my opponent's position is that he's been inconsistent," Mr. Bush said. "He changes positions. And you cannot change positions in this war on terror if you expect to win.

"And I expect to win. It's necessary we win. We're being challenged like never before, and we have a duty to our country and to future generations of America to achieve a free Iraq, a free Afghanistan, and to rid the world of weapons of mass destruction."

Leaning over the lectern and staring intensely into the camera, Mr. Bush said: "I understand what it means to be the commander in chief. And if I were to ever say this is the wrong war at the wrong time at the right -- wrong place, the troops would wonder, 'How can I follow this guy?"'

But Mr. Kerry, a Democratic senator from Massachusetts, portrayed Mr. Bush as a headstrong leader whose rush to war in Iraq had isolated the nation in the world community, enraged the Arab world and permitted Osama bin Laden to remain free.

At one point, Mr. Kerry went so far as to quote from the memoirs of Mr. Bush's father in arguing what he said was the folly of trying to unseat Mr. Hussein without a clear plan for how to get out.

"I believe in being strong and resolute and determined, and I will hunt down and kill the terrorists wherever they are," Mr. Kerry said.

Addressing the moderator, Jim Lehrer of PBS, he said: "But we also have to be smart, Jim. And smart means not diverting your attention from the real war on terror in Afghanistan against Osama bin Laden and taking it off to Iraq, where the 9/11 commission confirms there was no connection to 9/11 itself and Saddam Hussein. And where the reason for going to war was weapons of mass destruction, not the removal of Saddam Hussein."

He said, "This president has made, I regret to say, a colossal error of judgment, and judgment is what we look for in the president of the United States of America.

Aides to both candidates viewed the debate as a moment that could shake up a contest in which Democrats feared Mr. Kerry had been at a disadvantage since Mr. Bush's nominating convention. Coming into the debate, Mr. Bush and his aides seemed jaunty and confident, though at the debate itself the president was often unsmiling and at moments appeared coiled.

At one point, Mr. Kerry criticized Mr. Bush for failing to enlist the help of the United Nations and other allies before going into Iraq, saying that as a result the United States was enduring a disproportionate number of casualties and costs.

"When we went in, there were three countries: Great Britain, Australia and the United States," he said. "That's not a grand coalition. We can do better."

"Well, actually you forgot Poland," Mr. Bush said. "And now there are 30 nations involved, standing side by side with our American troops. And I honor their sacrifices, and I don't appreciate it when a candidate for president denigrates the contributions of these brave, brave soldiers."

Mr. Kerry began attacking Mr. Bush almost from the moment the two men entered from opposite sides of the stage -- Mr. Bush from stage right, Mr. Kerry from stage left -- and took their positions at their lecterns.

Although Iraq took up nearly two-thirds of the discussion, the candidates offered conflicting views on how to deal with nuclear weapons in Iraq and North Korea. Mr. Kerry said that Mr. Bush's refusal to engage in bilateral negotiations with Kim Jong Il, the North Korean president, had permitted the country to develop nuclear weapons while Mr. Bush was preoccupied in Iraq.

"For two years, this administration didn't talk at all to North Korea," he said, adding: "Today there are four to seven nuclear weapons in the hands of North Korea. That happened on this president's watch. "

Mr. Bush said that bilateral talks, by excluding the Chinese, would remove what he said was now leverage the United States had on North Korea. "The minute we have bilateral talks, the six-party talks will unwind," he said. "It's exactly what Kim Jong Il wants."

On the Sudan, Mr. Kerry strongly suggested he was prepared to send United States forces in to end the killing. "I'll tell you this: As president, if it took American forces to some degree to coalesce the African Union, I'd be prepared to do it, because we could never allow another Rwanda. It's a moral responsibility for us in the world."

Mr. Bush stopped short of that, though he too deplored the killing there. "We have committed $200 million worth of aid. We're the leading donor in the world to help the suffering people there. We will commit more over time to help."

Early in the debate, Mr. Lehrer, the host of the "Newshour" on PBS, asked Mr. Bush if he agreed that the election of Mr. Kerry would increase the chances of a terrorist attack on American soil, an assertion that a number of Republicans -- including Vice President Dick Cheney -- have made. Mr. Bush did not directly respond to the question, and Mr. Lehrer did not return to it.

At every turn, Mr. Bush sought to portray himself as resolute, drawing an unfavorable contrast with his opponent, using the war in Iraq to make his point. "What I won't do is change my core values because of politics or because or pressure," he said at one point. He added, "You cannot wilt under pressure."

Mr. Kerry said yet again that his position on Iraq had been consistent. "I have no intention of wilting. I've never wilted in my life."
