President Reagan and Walter F. Mondale engaged in blunt, sometimes highly personal exchanges as they clashed on economic and social issues tonight in their first debate of the 1984 Presidential campaign.

Mr. Mondale, who went into the debate trailing badly in the public opinion polls, pressed Mr. Reagan persistently throughout the 90-minute session.

The Democratic challenger turned in one of his most vigorous performances as a candidate. Grinning broadly, he challenged Mr. Reagan to tell how he would reduce the record budget deficits run up under his Administration and accused him of a failure of leadership in the bombings of American installations in Lebanon.

Exchanges on Social IssuesSome of the sharpest exchanges came over social issues such as prayer in the schools and abortion, as Mr. Mondale suggested that Mr. Reagan in a second term would allow conservative religious figures, including the Rev. Jerry Falwell, head of Moral Majority, to dictate Supreme Court appointments.

For much of the debate, Mr. Reagan appeared less confident than he customarily does on television. Later, as Mr. Mondale's advisers, clearly pleased, asserted that the former Vice President had rejuvenated his candidacy, Reagan aides were noticeably subdued. A senior White House official, speaking on condition that he not be named, said the President had been ''more tentative'' in his closing statements than he was in the 1980 campaign debates.

Reagan on the DefensiveReagan advisers also acknowledged that the President had been thrown on the defensive in spirited exchanges on the abortion issue. Although campaign strategists in both camps said it would be three days or more before they could measure the debate's effect on voters, the immediate consensus among political figures and reporters was that Mr. Mondale had made the stronger showing, even though Mr. Reagan managed to avoid any damaging gaffes.

Moreover, it was unclear whether Mr. Mondale's performance would elevate his standing in the polls.

Mr. Reagan attempted to rise above Mr. Mondale's criticism in his closing statement. He argued that he deserved a second term by recalling his question in the 1980 campaign: ''Are you better off than you were four years ago?''

''The question, I think, should be enlarged,'' Mr. Reagan said. ''Is America better off that it was four years ago?''

He contended that his Administration had given the country a more prosperous economy, a more secure defense and a new national mood. ''I think we've given the American people back their spirit,'' he concluded. Mr. Mondale, after thanking Mr. Reagan for agreeing to debate when it was not a political necessity for him, played off the President's question. ''Well, if you're wealthy, you're better off,'' he said. But he said the nation would not be better off in the future if Mr. Reagan's policies on arms control, the environment, the deficit and social policy were continued.

''Can we say, really say, that we will be better off when we pull away from sort of that basic American instinct of decency and fairness?'' Mr. Mondale asked, sounding a theme that irritated Mr. Reagan noticeably through the debate.

'There You Go Again'

Mr. Reagan, who at times appeared nettled by Mr. Mondale's briskly critical tone, defended himself by edging closer to an absolute promise not to raise taxes in a second term. And, with a twinkle in his eye, Mr. Reagan, when accused of having a secret plan for tax increases, hauled out the trademark phrase he used against President Carter in their debate in 1980.

''You know, I wasn't going to say this at all, but I can't help it,'' Mr. Reagan said, glancing at Mr. Mondale. ''There you go again. I don't have a plan to raise taxes.''

Mr. Mondale appeared to be waiting for Mr. Reagan to use the line. In one of the evening's more dramatic scenes, Mr. Mondale turned to face the President, rested an elbow on the lectern and said, in a casual, almost chatty tone: ''Now, Mr. President, you said, 'There you go again.' Right? Remember the last time you said that?''

Mr. Mondale said Mr. Reagan had used the line in denying President Carter's charge that Mr. Reagan, if elected, would try to cut Medicare. ''And what did you do right after the election? You went out and tried to cut $20 billion out of Medicare. And so when you say, 'There you go again,' people remember this, you know.''

An Electric Tension

At times, there seemed almost an electric tension between the two candidates, although the encounter began with a warm handshake and smiling exchange of greetings.

On the issue of abortion, Mr. Mondale posed this question: ''Does every woman in America have to appear before a judge picked by Jerry Falwell to approve her personal judgment?''

The President spent much of the evening on the defensive, and not only on his fiscal policies. He was also challenged to square his lack of church attendance with his public professions of faith.

Mr. Reagan said he did not attend church because of security considerations. ''I pose a threat to several hundred people if I go to church,'' he said. ''I miss going to church, but I think the Lord understands.'' Accusation on Benefits

Mr. Mondale, who seemed to have his answers honed more sharply than did Mr. Reagan, moved immediately to air two key issues, Social Security and Medicare, by accusing Mr. Reagan of planning to cut the benefits to the elderly and the ill.

He also ignored the ground rules of the debate, which was supposed to be limited to domestic policy, in citing the bombings in Lebanon as evidence of a disengaged President not in control of the White House.

The Social Security charge roused the President. ''A President should never say never, but I am going to violate the rule and say never,'' he said with some heat. ''I will never reduce Social Security benefits to people that are now getting them.'' A Moment of Praise

Mr. Mondale, in what seemed a calculated comment, softened his attacks by praising Mr. Reagan near the end of the debate for restoring American spirit. ''I like President Reagan,'' he said. ''There are deep differences between us about our future, and that's the basis of our campaign.''

Even before the debate ended, White House aides were moving to combat the impression that Mr. Reagan had been outpointed in the spirited exchanges. James A. Baker 3d, the White House chief of staff, sent a message to a press area in the debate hall that said Mr. Reagan was turning in a ''first-rate performance.''

Larry Speakes, the White House spokesman, also offered praise as the debate was still on the air. He said he was ''extremely pleased about the Presdent's performance.''

''The President is clearly in command of the facts, still the champion,'' Mr. Speakes said in a statement. Mondale at the Ready

From inside the hall, it was apparent that Mr. Mondale was in a high state of readiness, taking the initiative in his contacts with the President at the beginning and end of the debate.

In contrast, Mr. Reagan appeared more subdued and was sometimes tentative in his answers. Mr. Reagan's voice was noticeably quavering, particularly in the early going. At other times, the President appeared angry at suggestions that he lacked compassion.

Mr. Mondale also stirred strong audience response, as if at times the audience almost savored his daring assaults on Presidential dignity. One such moment came when Mr. Mondale quoted Will Rogers's remark about Herbert Hoover in denigrating Mr. Reagan's grasp of social issues.

''It's not what he doesn't know tht bothers me,'' Mr. Mondale said. ''It's what he knows for sure that just ain't so.''

With this remark, Mr. Mondale turned to Mr. Reagan and grinned broadly. Mondale Aides Happy

Mr. Mondale's aides appeared happy after the debate, arguing that Mr. Mondale had gained a fresh foothold in the campaign.

''We are on a high,'' said Richard C. Leone, the Mondale aide in charge of developing a campaign message. ''I think Mondale took command of the debate. That was clear to everybody. Anything is possible now. We have restarted the race. The contrast was more striking than we had ever hoped for.''

At the debate tonight, Mr. Reagan and Mr. Mondale responded to questions from three journalists, Diane Sawyer of CBS News, Fred Barnes of The Baltimore Sun and James G. Wieghart of Scripps-Howard Newspapers, who until last month was editor of The Daily News in New York City. The moderator was Barbara Walters of ABC News. Another Debate Planned

Mr. Reagan and Mr. Mondale are to meet in Kansas City on Oct. 21 in a second debate, that one on foreign policy. Their running mates, Vice President Bush and Geraldine A. Ferraro, are to debate in Philadelphia on Thursday.

Mr. Reagan, already riding a lead of 23 points in The New York Times/CBS News Poll, came here this afternoon as the candidate with little to gain and much to lose in the 90-minute encounter with his Democratic opponent.

Peter D. Hart, poll taker for Mr. Mondale, said that despite Mr. Reagan's big advantage in the polls, about a third of his support was among ''movable voters'' who could be influenced by the television and radio broadcast of the debate. 3 to 4 Days 'Critical'

''The critical period is 72 to 96 hours after the debate'' for assessing whether the contest has become closer, Mr. Hart said on the ABC News program ''This Week.''

Richard Wirthlin, Mr. Reagan's poll taker, concurred that it would be at least midweek before experts could judge the outcome of the first debate, which was confined to domestic issues.

''In the past, debates have had some impact, but it's generally taken three or four days for the impact to really register,'' Mr. Wirthlin said on the NBC News program ''Meet the Press.'' Millions Tuned In

According to The New York Times/ CBS News Poll, about 83 percent of the probable voters said they would watch the debate, broadcast on the three major commercial television networks and on radio. This would have produced an audience of about 93 million people, although rating services are to announce their estimates of the actual audience later in the week.

The Times/CBS News Poll indicated that about a quarter of the likely voters believed that the debates could have a lot to do with their voting choice.

The poll also indicated that Mr. Mondale's criticism of Mr. Reagan as trying to avoid discussion the issues was sinking in. Nineteen percent of those polled believed this to be the case, while only 3 percent thought that Mr. Mondale had avoided the issues.
