Senator John Kerry assailed President Bush for a record of soaring deficits and anemic job growth and a foreign policy that stirred resentment around the globe in a tense and testy second debate last night. Mr. Bush derided Mr. Kerry as a liberal who would usher in higher taxes and bigger government and would make the United States less safe.

For 90 heated minutes as they paced across a platform in a ''town hall'' forum at Washington University in St. Louis, Mr. Bush and Mr. Kerry offered sharply different responses in heated language to virtually every question that came before them: from health care to taxes, from Iran to Iraq, to who should be on the Supreme Court and what kind of limits should be placed on stem cell research. One of the few things they agreed on was that they would not support the reimposition of a military draft.

The debate was entirely different from the staid encounter held last week, when the men were anchored to lecterns in Coral Gables, Fla.

With rules that permitted them to roam the hall as they answered questions from 140 undecided voters, Mr. Kerry and Mr. Bush repeatedly bounded out of their chairs, sometimes talking over the host, Charles Gibson of ABC News, as they struggled to get the upper hand in a session that at times verged on a free-form debate. The audience remained hushed at the show before it.

Again and again, Mr. Bush sought to portray his opponent as an out-of-step liberal who would raise taxes on the middle class in order to pay for what he asserted was $2.2 trillion in big government programs -- a figure Mr. Kerry disputed -- and whose record of inconsistent statements would make him an inviting target for the nation's enemies.

''It's just not credible to say he's going to keep taxes down and balance budgets,'' Mr. Bush said. ''It's just not credible when he talks about being fiscally conservative.'' [Transcript, Page A12; video, nytimes.com.]

''If you look at his record in the Senate he voted to break the spending caps over 200 times,'' he said. ''And here he says he's going to be a fiscal conservative all of a sudden.''

Again and again, Mr. Kerry portrayed Mr. Bush as a president who had squandered a huge surplus left by President Bill Clinton in order to push through tax cuts for the wealthy that Mr. Kerry said had led to ruinous cuts in spending on social and antiterrorist programs at home.

When Mr. Bush, sounding like his father running against Gov. Michael S. Dukakis in 1988, described his opponent as the single most liberal Democrat in the Senate, Mr. Kerry smiled evenly and looked at Mr. Bush.

''The president is just trying to scare everybody here with throwing labels around,'' Mr. Kerry said, addressing the crowd of 140 uncommitted voters. ''I mean, compassionate conservative? What does that mean? Cutting 500,000 kids from after school programs? Cutting 365,000 kids from health care? Running up the biggest deficits in American history? Mr. President, you're batting 0 for 2.''

And when a voter challenged Mr. Kerry to pledge on television not to raise taxes on families making less than $200,000, he walked toward a camera and stared into it. ''Absolutely,'' he said. ''Right into the camera, yes. I am not going to raise taxes.''

Mr. Bush, whose uneven performance last week had stirred concern among Republicans, particularly as post-debate polls showed him losing his lead to Mr. Kerry, seemed hesitant and spoke loudly when he took the stage. But the president, who seemed distracted and fidgety in the Sept. 30 debate, grew increasingly comfortable through the night, though at times he flashed glances of anger at Mr. Kerry that were reminiscent of his demeanor the week before. At one point, Mr. Bush mistakenly referred to Mr. Kerry as ''Senator Kennedy.''

By contrast, Mr. Kerry seemed assured and comfortable for most of the night, particularly as the discussion moved from foreign policy and into domestic policy for the second half of the debate. The one moment when Mr. Kerry seemed strained was when he sought to explain his position on abortion.

The debate at times almost resembled a free-form conversation between two men who clearly have different views of where the United States is today and where it should be going.

Mr. Bush heatedly defended his decision to invade Iraq, though he acknowledged what has proved to be a politically traumatic week in which the United States weapons inspector in Iraq issued a report that undermined Mr. Bush's central rationale for taking the country to war -- that Saddam Hussein possessed weapons of mass destruction.

''I wasn't happy when we found out there wasn't weapons, and we've got an intelligence group together to figure out why,'' he said. ''But Saddam Hussein was a unique threat, and the world is better off without him in power.''

Mr. Kerry declared that Mr. Bush's invasion of Iraq had in fact made the United States more vulnerable to a terrorist attack at home. ''This president rushed to war, pushed our allies aside, and Iran now is more dangerous, and so is North Korea, with nuclear weapons,'' he said. ''He took his eye off the ball, off of Osama bin Laden.''

But Mr. Bush said that Mr. Kerry was mistaken in thinking that the threat of terrorism was limited to Mr. bin Laden.

''It's a fundamental misunderstanding to say that the war on terror is only Osama bin Laden,'' Mr. Bush said. ''The war on terror is to make sure that these terrorist organizations do not end up with weapons of mass destruction.''

Throughout the night, Mr. Bush seemed eager to dispel the perception from last week that he was unengaged -- particularly when Mr. Kerry assailed his decision to take the nation to war in Iraq. At one point Mr. Bush practically talked over Mr. Gibson after Mr. Kerry asserted that the president had gone to war without the support of much of the world.

''I've got to answer this,'' Mr. Bush said, adding, ''You tell Tony Blair we're going alone.''

''We've got 30 countries there,'' he said. ''It denigrates an alliance to say we're going alone, to discount their sacrifices. ''

Mr. Kerry responded tartly: ''Mr. President, countries are leaving the coalition, not joining. Eight countries have left it.''

At another point, when a questioner challenged Mr. Bush about whether he had adequately prepared for the outcome of the toppling of Mr. Hussein, the president responded by saying that he had taken the advice of generals in going to war, declaring that he had given them what they said they needed.

''I remember sitting in the White House looking at those generals, saying, 'Do you have what you need in this war? Do you have what it takes?''' Mr. Bush said. ''I remember going down to the basement of the White House the day we committed our troops, as a last resort, looking at Tommy Franks and the generals on the ground, asking them, 'Do we have the right plan with the right troop level?''' Mr. Bush said. ''And they looked me in the eye and said, 'Yes, sir, Mr. President.'''

Mr. Kerry rose slowly from his seat. ''You rely on good military people to execute the military component of the strategy, but winning the peace is larger than just the military component,'' he said, adding: ''Military's job is to win the war. The president's job is to win the peace.''

The very first question to Mr. Kerry was about what a voter said was his ''wishy-washy'' stance on issues -- a reputation that Mr. Kerry asserted was unfair and was the result of Mr. Bush's campaign of attacks on him.

''The president didn't find weapons of mass destruction in Iraq, so he has really turned his campaign into a weapon of mass deception,'' he said. ''And the result is that you've been bombarded with advertisements suggesting that I've changed a position on this or that or the other.''

Three voters in the audience said after the debate that they were unmoved by the candidates' answers and that they remained undecided.

''I'm no more near a decision now than I was this time yesterday,'' said Linda Grabel, a 63-year-old legal secretary who asked Mr. Bush at the end of the debate whether he could name ''three instances where you realized you made a wrong decision and what you did to correct it.''

She said it appeared that Mr. Bush misunderstood her question and believed she was talking about the Iraq war when she was, in fact, speaking far more generally.

''We all have said 'Ooh, that was a dumb decision, here's what I have to do to fix it,''' she added. ''I wanted to know: Give me some of those decisions, what were they, and how did you fix them?''

Mark Jeffrey, 45, an audience member who did not ask a question, said he had been leaning toward Mr. Bush and still was, but was not certain he would vote for him. ''I'm going to take a hard look,'' he said.

Mr. Jeffrey said he believed Mr. Bush's performance was an improvement from last week. ''He tried hard to work on some of the areas he got knocked down on,'' he said.

After a month in which much of the debate between the two men has been driven by Iraq, Mr. Bush and Mr. Kerry spoke extensively about the domestic issues that Democrats had once hoped would form the undergirding of the campaign.

The two men repeatedly clashed over health care, a central issue for Mr. Kerry, who has proposed a major expansion of health coverage through subsidies to employers and enrolling more children and low-income adults in the public programs. Mr. Bush asserted that the program would inevitably lead to higher taxes, asking, scornfully: ''He says he's going to have a novel health care plan. You know what it is? The federal government's going to run it. It is the largest increase in federal government health care ever.''

Mr. Kerry, whose plan does not involve a federal takeover of health care, replied: ''Labels don't mean anything. What means something is, do you have a plan?''

They also debated, in response to a question, over what kind of justices they would appoint to the Supreme Court, where two or more vacancies are considered likely in the next term. Mr. Bush initially shot back, ''I'm not telling,'' then said his justices would be those who would ''not allow their personal opinion to get in the way of the law'' and ''strictly interpret the constitution of the United States.''

On abortion, Mr. Kerry noted that he was a Catholic but added, ''I can't take what is an article of faith for me and legislate it for someone who doesn't share that article of faith.'' He said he was against ''partial-birth abortions,'' a type of abortion used in the second and third trimesters, but said that any ban on the procedure needed an exception to protect the health of the woman. And on laws requiring parental notification, Mr. Kerry said, ''I'm not going to require a 16- or 17-year-old kid who's been raped by her father and who's pregnant to have to notify her father.''

On partial-birth abortion, Mr. Bush shot back: ''It's pretty simple when you say, are you for a ban, yes or no? He was given a chance to vote and he voted no.'' Mr. Bush added, ''You can run but you can't hide.''

The two men were also asked about federal financing for stem cell research, which is controversial because it involves destroying human embryos. Mr. Kerry said that he supported loosening the restrictions imposed by Mr. Bush. ''I think it is respecting life to reach for that cure, and the president has chosen a policy that makes it impossible.''

Mr. Bush, an opponent of abortion, said: ''I had to make the decision, do we destroy more life? I made the decision to balance science and ethics.'' Mr. Bush's policy allows federal research on stem cell lines that were already in existence at the time he announced it.

Mr. Kerry retorted, ''Talk about walking a waffling line.''

The men also clashed over legislation that would permit the importation of lower-cost prescription drugs from Canada. Mr. Bush said his main concern was ensuring the safety of those drugs and said, ''Now, it may very well be here in December you hear me say I think there's a safe way to do it.''

Mr. Kerry reminded the audience that Mr. Bush had made a similar promise when he was running four years ago, and he proceeded to assail Mr. Bush for the Medicare drug benefit passed by Congress last year.

''He put $139 billion of windfall profit into the pockets of the drug companies right out of your pockets,'' he said. ''That's the difference between us. The president sides with the power companies, the oil companies, the drug companies; and I'm fighting to let you get those drugs from Canada and I'm fighting to let Medicare survive. I'm fighting for the middle class. That is the difference.''

Mr. Bush was asked to name three mistakes that he had made, and how he had addressed them. Mr. Bush, who had been unable to name a single mistake when asked a similar question at a news conference in March, said he had made some bad appointments, but that he did not want to name them because he did not want to embarrass anyone.

But, he said, on two of the dominant elements of his record -- tax cuts and Iraq -- he had no regrets.
