With public anxiety mounting over financial markets and the economy, Senator Barack Obama and Senator John McCain engaged in a spirited debate here Tuesday night over who was to blame for the current economic mess and whose plan would successfully address it.

In the second presidential debate, at Belmont University in Nashville, Obama faulted the Bush administration and by extension McCain for a deregulatory environment that he said led to the nation's economic crisis. And McCain, pledging to aid struggling homeowners, offered a new proposal to direct the federal government to save families from foreclosure by purchasing mortgages that were no longer affordable.

"As president of the United States," McCain said in response to an audience member's question, "I would order the Secretary of the Treasury to immediately buy up the bad home loan mortgages in America and renegotiate at the new value of those homes, at the diminished value of those homes and let people make those, be able to make those payments and stay in their homes. Is it expensive? Yes."

Obama aggressively engaged McCain throughout the debate, and repeatedly focused on bread-and-butter struggles of Americans, vowing to help them with a "rescue package" for the middle class, and not just banks and insurance companies on Wall Street. The first part, he said, was tax cuts for all American households making less than $250,000 a year.

"It means help for homeowners so that they can stay in their homes," Obama continued. "It means that we are helping state and local governments set up road projects andbridge projects that keep people in their jobs. And then long term we've got to fix our health care system, we've got to fix our energy system that is putting such an enormous burden on families."

The plunging markets in the United States and overseas and a freeze in commercial and consumer credit brought added urgency to Tuesday night's debate, with questioners at the town-hall style forum pressing the candidates for how they would address the spiraling financial crisis. But often the candidates seized on the questions to attack each others' records.

While Obama and McCain were outwardly civil to one another, they watched each other warily, sometimes with a thin smile, sometimes with a look of exasperation, as the other spoke directly to members of the audience. And somertimes McCain strolled across the stage as Obama spoke, generously peppering his answers with the words "my friends."

McCain aggressively pursued Obama's record in the Senate, claiming he had voted for billions of dollars in unneeded spending, including $3 million for a "projector for a planetarium in Chicago."

Obama said that McCain's campaign manager, Rick Davis, had accepted money for consulting for Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, the government-sponsored mortgage giants taken over by the federal government last month to protect them from collapse.

Neither Obama nor McCain offered an optimistic view of the American economy. Obama said that the nation was reaping the bitter fruit of eight years of the Bush administration's fiscal mismanagement and drive to deregulate markets, moves he said were supported by McCain.

McCain said that the way out of the current crisis depends on what actions the government takes. He called American workers "innocent bystanders" in the economic storm and said that one of his priorities would be to rid Washington of cronyism, greed and corruption.

"The system in Washington is broken and I have been a consistent reformer," McCain told one questioner who wanted to know why Americans should trust either party because both were complicit in the policies that led to the current problems.

Obama said: "I understand your frustration and your cynicism. There's a lot of blame to go around."

Pressed to name the most urgent problems they would address — health care, entitlement spending, or energy — Obama cited energy and health care first, while McCain said there was need to prioritize, bu then said entitlement spending should be put in check first.

And Obama often sought to connect with the crowd in personal terms.

He spoke of the importance of spending $15 billion a year over 10 years to become energy independence, noting "You're paying $3.80 here in Nashville" for gasoline. But he also called for making health care more accessible, saying that the "broken health care system is bad, not only for families, but it's making our businesses less competitive."

And he questioned the wisdom of McCain's tax cut plan, which he said would cost the nation $300 billion and would benefit large corporations, including oil companies.

Both candidates repeated some of their favorite refrains and charges from the campaign trail. McCain once again promoted offshore drilling — "We've got to drill offshore, my friends, and we've got to do it now" — while Obama said that McCain's proposal of a $5,000 tax credit for health insurance, which would be taxable, was in effect "what one hand giveth the other hand taketh away."

Tuesday's debate came at a pivotal moment in the campaign, particularly for McCain. He has been losing ground to Obama in the polls, both nationally and in battleground states. The stock market is plunging. The polls show that the public is highly anxious about the economy and convinced the country is headed down the wrong track, bad omens for the candidate of the incumbent party.

McCain's actions and words on the financial crisis have drawn criticism even from members of his own party.

He prepared intensively for the Nashville session, and indicated at a public appearance last week that he was prepared to "take the gloves off" and go directly at Obama's character, associations and judgment.

This was the second of three debates between Obama and McCain sponsored by the Commission on Presidential Debates; the two vice-presidential candidates, Senator Joseph Biden Jr. of Delaware and Governor Sarah Palin of Alaska, faced off last week in their only debate of the campaign.

The terms of the three meetings between the presidential candidates were negotiated with the commission by the two campaigns. By agreement, this debate was in a town hall-style format, with screened questions coming from the 80 uncommitted voters in the audience and from people who submitted questions over the Internet.

Tom Brokaw, the longtime former anchor of the "NBC Nightly News," was the moderator.

McCain prefers the town hall format to a more formal setting where candidates stand behind lecterns or sit at a table and take questions from a single moderator or a panel of journalists. Early in the campaign he invited Obama to participate in 10 such sessions with voters, but Obama declined.

The first debate, on Sept. 26 at the University of Mississippi, was marked by sharp exchanges on the financial crisis, taxes, government regulation, budget earmarks and the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan. McCain repeatedly demeaned Obama's experience and refused to look directly at him.

As for Obama, he remained cool — as he had during the two dozen Democratic primary debates — something that many took for a lack of fight or passion.

In addition, Obama said McCain's proposed tax cuts were skewed to the wealthy, and that he would continue the policies of the Bush administration. He continued on that tack Tuesday night.

The last of the presidential debates is scheduled for Oct. 15 at Hofstra University on Long Island.
