In a spirited confrontation before the nation's voters, Bob Dole used the final televised Presidential debate last night to attack the ethical and governmental record of President Clinton repeatedly as scandal tainted and undeserving of renewal at the ballot box.

''Many American people have lost their faith in government,'' Mr. Dole said, moving in quickly on the ethics attack in the opening moments of the debate in San Diego in an attempt to reverse Mr. Clinton's formidable leads in popularity polls just 20 days short of the election.

''They see scandals on almost a daily basis,'' Mr. Dole contended. ''They see ethical problems in the White House. There's a great deal of cynicism out there.''

President Clinton, the front-running incumbent wary of any jagged dialogue of charge and counter-charge, basically ignored the Republican challenger's accusations and instead repeatedly invoked the nation's economic health and his outlook for further growth in four more years of incumbency. $(Text, pages B10-13.$)

''Compared to four years ago, we're clearly better off,'' the President insisted. ''That progress is only the beginning.''

For all the buildup by Republican strategists to the 90-minute debate in the Shiley Theater at the University of San Diego, in which Mr. Dole was advertised as taking to relentless criticism of Mr. Clinton, the evening turned out to be a victory of sorts for the questioners, who pressed the candidates with highly specific issues that generally kept the confrontation short of open anger.

Mr. Clinton, while avoiding an aggressive posture, did not hesitate to challenge some of the former Senate majority leader's assertions on matters of public policy, particularly his contention that the current state of the economy was the worst in this century.

''In February he said we had the best economy in 30 years,'' the President said in rebuttal, quickly turning an old Ronald Reagan line against Mr. Dole in a direct appeal to the audience: ''If you believe that the California economy was better in 1992 than today, you should vote for Bob Dole.''

Both politicians, standing on a red-carpeted debating stage with their political careers on the line, tangled over an array of issues including Medicare and fighting nicotine addiction. The setting of a town hall forum was designed to offer audience interaction, and not merely one-on-one confrontation.

As expected, the President moved ever closer to the audience during the debate, as if he were the host for the evening's program. Mr. Dole preferred more of a debater's center-stage stance as he denounced the Clinton record.

The former Senator had to finesse the amiability of the setting to keep Mr. Clinton in the cross hairs of his attack strategy. He labored to move quickly from the questions' specific subject matter back to his attack on the President.

Asked whether the nation's move toward managed health care was ''going downhill,'' Mr. Dole responded by denouncing ''the national health care system President Clinton wanted to give us'' in 1993. ''If that isn't a liberal idea, I don't know what is,'' he said.

As the evening wore on, Mr. Dole, despite his strategy, seemed to ease deeper at times into the details of questions on health, the economy, jobs and welfare put by a group of 113 uncommitted voters chosen by the Gallup polling organization. A more congenial mood prevailed and the ethics attacks faded somewhat from center stage, although nettlesome moments flared.

''I don't think Senator Dole is too old to be President,'' Mr. Clinton answered one questioner. ''It's the age of his ideas that I question.''

Mr. Dole shot back: ''When you don't have any ideas I guess you say the other person's ideas are old.'' This, he said, was ''the liberal philosophy.''

At the heart of the debate before tens of millions of watching Americans was the Republicans' running frustration that Mr. Clinton's lead in the public opinion polls has lingered firmly in the double digits despite the Democrats' surprising loss of Congress in 1994 and a veritable fusillade of Republican-encouraged investigations and allegations of White House affairs for the past two years.

While Mr. Dole sought to remind voters of the latter, he was put on the defensive by the President on such issues as rising Medicare costs.

''We'll work it out,'' Mr. Dole said, accusing Mr. Clinton of playing politics with the issue. ''If all you have is fear, that's all you can use.''

The President countered that Republicans would painfully curtail Medicare. ''We need to reform it, not wreck it,'' he said while complimenting Mr. Dole as acting responsibly in the 1983 bipartisan compromise that bolstered Social Security.

Throughout the confrontation, the President led with the economy and his promise of that ''bridge to the 21st century.''

''We worked hard to bring the deficit down,'' Mr. Clinton said, pointedly reminding the audience that the Congressional Republican majority is widely blamed for ''shutting down the Government'' in budget disputes earlier this year.

''It's important that we go beyond these old partisan arguments,'' he said in deflecting Mr. Dole's criticisms while once again denouncing the challenger's proposed 15 percent tax cut as a ''scheme that will blow a huge hole in the deficit.''

Mr. Dole's ethics attacks ranged from ''the 30-some in your Administration'' dismissed, resigned or under investigation, by the former Senator's count, to the alleged abuse of hundreds of personnel files, Republicans included, by White House investigators. He generally avoided, however, references to the tangle of charges, inquiries and felony convictions known as Whitewater.

''The President of the United States has a public trust,'' said Mr. Dole. ''I know that trust is being violated.''

Mr. Dole tried to be brief on his earlier controversy over whether nicotine is addictive: ''Don't smoke. Don't drink. Don't use drugs.''

But Mr. Clinton described the issue as one of their biggest differences. ''No President had ever taken on the tobacco lobby before,'' he said. ''I did. Senator Dole opposed me.''

When a cardiologist asked what the candidates would do to fix the health system, Mr. Dole quickly seized the opportunity to lambaste Mr. Clinton on Medicare.

''Let me say, there you go again Mr. President,'' Mr. Dole said, asserting that Mr. Clinton had repeatedly accused the Republicans of cutting the Medicare program for the elderly, when in fact they were only reducing its rate of growth.

''Let's stop talking about cutting Medicare,'' he said. ''If I were a senior citizen, I'd be fed up with all these ads scaring them.''

Mr. Clinton responded that the Republicans' idea of saving Medicare ''was to have the poorest Americans pay more.'' He added, ''We need to reform it, not wreck it.''

Mr. Dole also used the question to remind people of Mr. Clinton's proposed overhaul of the health care system, calling it an ''extreme'' plan that he said would have closed 700 hospitals and created 50 new bureaucracies.

Mr. Clinton defended his efforts, saying, ''We've worked hard to promote more competition to bring down inflation'' and declaring that he had added a million more children to Medicaid coverage, protected 25 million people, made health insurance portable from job to job, and required 48 hour minimum stays for new mothers. ''That's a good start,'' he said.

After hearing complaints from a health care worker about managed-care programs, Mr. Dole said he would favor a Federal commission to study the issue. ''When we take away choices,'' Mr. Dole said, ''then I think we've taken a giant step backward.''

Mr. Clinton responded that he supported managed-care plans that allow people ''three choices and have a right to get out once a year.'' The President also said that ''doctors shouldn't be kicked out of care plans just because they tell patients'' what they need.

Responding to a question about the looming problems in Social Security and how to help people save more for their retirements, the candidates found themselves in near total agreement. Both of them advocated changing the rules for Individual Retirement Accounts to allow money saved in them to be used for health care, education and the purchase of a first home. And both said that it would take a bipartisan agreement to fix the Social Security system when it runs short of cash as the baby boom generation retires.

''We'll work it out,'' Mr. Dole said, noting that he was a member of a nonpartisan commission that rescued the system originally in 1983.

When Mr. Dole was asked how, at his age, he could relate to young people, Mr. Dole responded with a lighthearted argument. ''Wisdom comes from age, experience and intelligence,'' he said. ''I have some age, some experience and some intelligence. That adds up to wisdom.''

On the CNN program ''Larry King Live'' last night in Atlanta, Ross Perot, the Reform Party candidate, fielded questions from a cable audience in much the same way that the President and Mr. Dole did in San Diego earlier in the evening.

His answers to questions from the audience reiterated Reform Party positions, including his belief in the need for deficit reduction and a tightening of campaign finance laws.

In his closing remarks, however, Mr. Perot urged four groups to vote for him on Nov. 5. He singled out Americans in the military and their families, owners of small businesses, adults between the ages of 18 and 34 and those of voting age who are unlikely to vote.
