Senator John McCain used the final debate of the presidential election on Wednesday night to raise persistent and pointed questions about Senator Barack Obama's character, judgment and policy prescriptions in a session that was by far the most spirited and combative of their encounters this fall.

At times showing anger and at others a methodical determination to make all his points, McCain pressed his Democratic rival on taxes, spending, the tone of the campaign and his association with the former Weather Underground leader William Ayers, using nearly every argument at his disposal in an effort to alter the course of a contest that has increasingly gone Obama's way.

But Obama maintained a placid and at times bemused demeanor — if at times appearing to work at it — as he parried the attacks and pressed his consistent line that McCain would represent a continuation of President George W. Bush's unpopular policies, especially on the economy.

That set the backdrop for one of the sharpest exchanges of the evening, when, in response to Obama's statement that McCain had repeatedly supported Bush's economic policies, McCain fairly leaped out of his chair to say: "Senator Obama, I am not President Bush. If you wanted to run against President Bush, you should have run four years ago."

Acknowledging McCain had his differences with Bush, Obama replied, "The fact of the matter is that if I occasionally mistake your policies for George Bush's policies, it's because on the core economic issues that matter to the American people — on tax policy, on energy policy, on spending priorities — you have been a vigorous supporter of President Bush."

The debate touched on a wide variety of issues, including abortion, judicial appointments, trade and climate change as well as the economy, with the candidates often making clear the deep differences between them.

But it also put on display the two very different temperaments of the candidates with less than three weeks until Election Day. The lasting image of the night could be the split screen of Obama, doing his best to maintain his unflappable demeanor under a sometimes withering attack, and McCain looking coiled, occasionally breathing deeply, apparently in an expression of impatience.

Sitting side by side with only the host, Bob Schieffer of CBS News, between them on the stage at Hofstra University, McCain made clear from the start that he was going to follow the prescriptions of many of his supporters — among them his running mate, Governor Sarah Palin of Alaska — and try to put Obama on the defensive and shake him from his steady debate style.

Seizing on an encounter in Ohio this week with a voter — Joe Wurzelbacher, a plumber — who told Obama that he feared that his tax policies would punish him as a small-business owner, McCain pressed his attack on Obama as a tax-and-spend liberal. Obama's plan would raise taxes on filers earning more than $250,000 a year, a category that includes some small businesses, but would cut taxes on households earning less than $200,000 a year.

Seeking to suggest that Obama would hurt the economy and many entrepreneurs, McCain said, "The whole premise behind Senator Obama's plans are class warfare — let's spread the wealth around," repeating a phrase Obama had used to Wurzelbacher in explaining the rationale for his upper-income tax increase.

"Why would you want to do that — anyone, anyone in America — when we have such a tough time, when these small-business people like Joe the Plumber are going to create jobs unless you take that money from him and spread the wealth around," McCain said.

The plumber came up directly or indirectly 24 times during the debate, an Everyman symbol of the divide between the candidates on how best to address the economy.

As he has done in previous encounters, Obama looked into the camera and repeated his plan: "Now, the conversation I had with Joe the Plumber, what I essentially said to him was, five years ago, when you weren't in the position to buy your business, you needed a tax cut then. And what I want to do is to make sure that the plumber, the nurse, the firefighter, the teacher, the young entrepreneur who doesn't yet have money, I want to give them a tax break now."

Coming on a day that the Dow Jones average had one of its worst drops in history, Schieffer tried something other moderators had failed to do this fall: get the two candidates to enumerate which proposals they would specifically have to postpone or cut in the face of an economic environment that has changed drastically since they first drew up their plans.

Neither man went very far, though McCain perhaps offered a more detailed list. Repeating his pledge of an across-the-board spending cut, he said, "Well, one of them would be the marketing assistance program. Another one would be a number of subsidies for ethanol."

Obama, for his part, specifically cited the "$15 billion a year on subsidies to insurance companies," a component of the Medicare program. But, he said more generally, "we need to eliminate a whole host of programs that don't work, and I want to go through the federal budget line by line, page by page. Programs that don't work, we should cut."

Still, though the winner of this election will inherit the most sweeping federal intervention in financial markets in at least three generations, the debate, while not short of policy discussions, was at least as much about the styles of the two men as they engaged one another.

In the days before the debate, Obama had appeared to have goaded McCain, saying in an interview with ABC News that he did not know why McCain had not personally made an issue of Obama's association with Ayers, with whom he worked with on two nonprofit boards, in their last debate considering that McCain's campaign had done so repeatedly in recent weeks.

And there was some degree of anticipation over whether McCain would do so this time. He did, though only after a bit of prompting from Schieffer, who, in a question about the tone of the campaign directed at both men, asked McCain specifically, "Your running mate said he palled around with terrorists."

McCain initially did not address that point directly.

But as Schieffer seemed prepared to move to another topic, McCain returned to Ayers on his own. McCain seemed most agitated in that moment, saying: "I don't care about an old, washed-up terrorist. But as Senator Clinton said in her debates with you, we need to know the full extent of that relationship. We need to know the full extent of Senator Obama's relationship with Acorn, who is now on the verge of maybe perpetrating one of the greatest frauds in voter history in this country, maybe destroying the fabric of democracy."

He was referring to a community activist group that focuses on housing issues and has been running voter registration efforts in many states that have drawn accusations of fraud.

Obama's aides said during the day that he was preparing for the Ayers question.

"Bill Ayers is a professor of education in Chicago. Forty years ago, when I was 8 years old, he engaged in despicable acts with a radical domestic group. I have roundly condemned those acts," Obama said. "Ten years ago, he served and I served on a board that was funded by one of Ronald Reagan's former ambassadors and close friends, Annenberg."

On Acorn, Obama said, "Apparently what they have done is they were paying people to go out and register folks. And apparently some of the people who were out there didn't really register people, they just filled out a bunch of names. Had nothing to do with us. We were not involved."

Speaking of his involvement with the group, he said, "The only involvement I've had with Acorn was I represented them alongside the U.S. Justice Department in making Illinois implement a motor voter law that helped people register at DMVs." Obama's campaign made some payments to an affiliate of Acorn.

Obama said sternly as McCain bristled, "And I think the fact that this has become such an important part of your campaign, Senator McCain, says more about your campaign than it says about me."
