Gov. George W. Bush and Vice President Al Gore agreed more than they disagreed last night in an event that was often closer to a cordial conversation than a debate as they exchanged views on tense foreign conflicts and domestic matters like racial profiling, gun control and same-sex marriage.

The forum in Winston-Salem, N.C., was a striking departure from the first debate a week ago in Boston, when they energetically took deeply different stands on issues like taxes and prescription drugs that have been at the heart of the presidential race.

But last night, breaking with their campaigns' scathing commercials and their own oratory, Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush were respectful, and at times even complimentary. The civility prompted Mr. Bush to volunteer at one point that it seemed "like we're having a great love-fest tonight."

The subdued tenor was largely deliberate. Advisers in both camps said their candidates were determined not to put off voters by coming across as strident. Yet many of the questions by the moderator, Jim Lehrer of PBS, were on issues over which the nominees had few differences.

Not until the last 15 minutes of the evening did the candidates grow slightly combative, with Mr. Gore questioning Mr. Bush's record as governor of Texas, and Mr. Bush asserting that the vice president's tendency to embellish raised questions about his credibility. That prompted the vice president to take the unusual step of apologizing for his previous misstatements.

Even when they did clash, the jabs were cloaked in decorous tones. At one point, Mr. Gore, who was hardly bashful at deriding his rival in the first debate, seemed to almost apologize when he turned to Mr. Bush and said of health care proposals in Texas: "I'm sorry to tell you, there is a record here."

The first half of the 90-minute forum at Wake Forest University was devoted to foreign policy, with the candidates' largely agreeing on the nation's policies in the Mideast and the Balkans. They both, for example, went farther than President Clinton in calling on Yasir Arafat, the Palestinian leader, to restrain the violence in Israel.

But their exchanges showed Mr. Gore to be more willing to use American force to intervene in regional conflicts.

The vice president said that a case of genocide almost automatically engaged American interests and that it was appropriate for troops to stay on to help ensure a democratic transition — a use of American power that Mr. Bush derided as "nation-building." For example, Mr. Gore supported American intervention in Haiti, which Mr. Bush characterized as a mistake.

Mr. Bush sought to present himself as a statesman by repeatedly saying he agreed with many of the administration's decisions. He also tried to demonstrate that he was as conversant on such matters as Mr. Gore, who has been at the center of many of the nation's most crucial decisions about international affairs. Mr. Bush made clear that he was strongly against sending troops and resources into failed states.

In a nod to the nearly two weeks of bloodshed in Israel, Mr. Bush said, "I think during the campaign, particularly during this difficult period, we ought to be speaking with one voice. And I appreciate the way the administration has worked hard to calm the tensions."

Mr. Bush, like Mr. Gore, often spoke in generalities about his foreign policy philosophy. "If we're an arrogant nation, they'll resent us," Mr. Bush said of people outside this country. "If we're a humble nation, but strong, they'll welcome us."

Mr. Gore emphasized his involvement in foreign policy and described a much more activist and broader moral mission for the United States in the plight of other countries.

Explaining his approach to foreign affairs, he said: "We have to protect our capacity to push forward what America's all about. That means not only military strength and our values. It also means keep our economy strong."

Just as they did when they took the stage in Boston last week, Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore confronted a frustrating and even tormenting reality when last night's debate began: while Mr. Bush has edged up slightly, he and the vice president are mired in a race that is a statistical dead heat. If for no other reason, the stakes in this debate were even greater than in last week's because Election Day is only 26 days away. The third and final debate is next Tuesday in St. Louis.

In many ways, the candidates sought to dispel the same critiques and stereotypes that have plagued them in the campaign. Mr. Bush sought to show that he was no bumbler and that he could comfortably navigate the ins and outs of policy, particularly foreign affairs.

Mr. Gore, who is well known as a policy maven, tried to demonstrate that he was a likable politician and not an unappealing brawler. He succeeded in halting the audible sighs that marked his performance last week; in a contrast to last week, he at times nodded affirmatively when Mr. Bush was speaking.

At times, there was a marked contrast between Mr. Gore's seeming efforts to restrain himself from appearing belligerent and Mr. Bush's relaxed, even expansive, demeanor near the end of the encounter.

Over all, the feel and the format of last night's debate seemed decidedly more casual than the first one. For one thing, Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush had already endured the drill once before. But the setting was somewhat more intimate. Rather than stand at lecterns, the candidates sat at a table with Mr. Lehrer.

The Bush campaign had pressed for the format in the debate negotiations. Mr. Bush's aides said he was far more comfortable in a more conversational format. It was the first time participants in a presidential debate sat at a table in that format.

It was not until the waning moments, under questioning by Mr. Lehrer, that the sparring began in earnest.

Mr. Gore said Mr. Bush had blocked hate crimes legislation, and he asserted that the governor presided over a state that ranked last in health insurance for families.

"Texas ranks 49th out of the 50 states in children with health care," Mr. Gore said, "49th for women with health care and 50th for families with health care."

For his part, Mr. Bush said the vice president had fought for a government-run health care system in the first two years of the Clinton administration. "That was fortunately stopped in its tracks," Mr. Bush said.

Governor Bush said Mr. Gore was "absolutely wrong" if he was trying to suggest that Mr. Bush was a hard- hearted person who did not care about children.

Mr. Bush acknowledged that a health insurance program for children "got a late start" in Texas. But, he insisted, "we're reducing the number of uninsured as a percentage of our population" in Texas, while the comparable figure is increasing nationally.

Mr. Gore said he was not questioning the purity of Mr. Bush's heart, but challenging his priorities and values. In Texas, Mr. Gore said, Mr. Bush "opposed a measure put forward by Democrats in the Legislature to expand the number of children that would be covered, and instead directed the money toward a tax cut, a significant part of which went to wealthy interests."

On the question of Mr. Gore's embellishments, Mr. Lehrer asked Mr. Bush if he thought the vice president did indeed "stretch the facts," and whether that was something the voters ought to consider.

"We all make mistakes," Mr. Bush responded. "I have been known to mangle a syl-ABBLE or two myself." The deliberate mispronunciation was, of course, an allusion to several word gaucheries Mr. Bush has committed of late, and it brought a flurry of laughter.

Turning suddenly serious, Mr. Bush said a president's credibility is important, both at home and abroad, and is something the voters should consider. "This isn't something new," he said of Mr. Gore, bringing up a memorandum from the latter's short 1988 presidential campaign in which a staff aide warned him to stick to the facts.

Looking back to their first debate, Mr. Gore admitted that he had tripped himself up on some facts. "I got some details wrong, and some examples," he said. "I'm sorry about that, and I'm going to try to do better."

In one area where both candidates seemed to agree, Mr. Gore said he would support legislation to ban racial profiling. And he repeated a pledge that his first act as president would be to issue an executive order banning the practice.

"It will be the first civil rights act of the 21st century," he said.

Mr. Bush agreed but added that he did not want to "federalize" the local police. "It's very important that we not overstep our bounds," he said.

But in a sharp moment reminding viewers of his firm enforcement of the death penalty, Mr. Bush pointed to the racially motivated murder of James Byrd, a black man dragged to his death in East Texas in June 1998.

"The three men who murdered James Byrd," he said, "guess what's going to happen to them? They're going to be put to death."

Mr. Gore then politely suggested that Mr. Bush was blurring his stance on hate-crimes legislation, saying that the governor had barred such legislation in Texas.

Both candidates said they opposed marriages for gays and lesbians. "I'm not for gay marriage," Mr. Bush said. "I think marriage is a sacred institution between a man ad a woman."

Mr. Gore agreed, but then added, "I think we should find a way to allow some kind of civic unions."

He invoked Mr. Bush's running mate, Dick Cheney, who in the vice- presidential debate last week joined Mr. Gore's running mate, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut, in sounding tolerant of such unions.

"I basically agree with Dick Cheney and Joe Lieberman, and I think the three of us have one view and the governor has another view."

Mr. Bush said he was not sure what kind of view Mr. Gore was describing, and added, "I can just tell you, I'm a person who respects other people."

The vice president also expressed his support for legislation to prevent gays and lesbians from being fired from their jobs because of their sexual orientation and asked the governor to lend his support. Mr. Bush replied, "I don't know the particulars of this law."

On gun control, Mr. Gore said he would "not do anything that would affect the rights" of hunters or sportsmen or homeowners seeking to protect their families.

Still, he said, "there are too many guns getting into the hands of children and criminals."

Mr. Gore said assault weapons were a particular problem. He said he favored closing the gun show loophole, for which he cast a deciding vote in the Senate. The Congress has failed to complete action on the bill, he said.

Mr. Gore said the government should strengthen enforcement of gun laws, keep schools gun free and issue child safety trigger locks on mandatory basis.

Mr. Bush echoed the importance of enforcing gun laws, saying criminals must know with "certainty" that they will be punished for using a weapon illegally.

He said he supported instant background checks at gun shows. Texas has been an innovator, Mr. Bush said, in distributing free trigger locks.

On the environment, an issue that has fascinated Mr. Gore for years, the vice president was asked whether he stood by his earlier statements that environmental protection should be the central priority in the new century. He said he did, explaining, "I think that in this 21st century, we will soon see the consequences of what's called global warming. What's happening is the level of pollution is increasing, significantly."

He said that an accusation, often made by his Republicans critics, that environmental concerns were in conflict with economic growth was "really outdated."
