The three Presidential candidates engaged in an earnest town-meeting exchange last night that became a forum for airing the nation's domestic woes during President Bush's Administration.

Mr. Bush defended his record and his sensitivity to the suffering of the recession. "Of course, you feel it when you're President of the United States," he said.

But he asserted that a Clinton Presidency would mean huge new taxes rather than a growing economy. "Governor Clinton's program wants to tax more and spend more," Mr. Bush said. "I don't believe that's the way to do it."

Governor Clinton, however, quickly dismissed the charge.

It was a night in which there were a few sweeping promises. Ross Perot, the independent candidate, promised he would serve only one term and would not take compensation for the $200,000-a-year job. Mr. Clinton promised to propose a universal health-care plan in the first 100 days of his Presidency. Thrives on Format

Mr. Clinton, who seemed to thrive on the town-meeting format that he had used throughout his primary campaign, presented himself as a man with long years of experience in dealing with the problems of ordinary people. He also asserted that the blame for these problems clearly rested with the "failed economic theory" of the Republicans.

Mr. Perot once again sharply criticized the "gridlock" in Washington, casting the two parties as mired in a cycle of blame that produced only economic drift and decline. "It's not the Republicans' fault, of course, and it's not the Democrats' fault," he said. "Somewhere out there there's an extraterrestrial that's doing this to us, I guess."

At the start of the program and in his closing statement, Mr. Bush tried to move the debate to the issue of character and trust, which he said should be a paramount consideration for voters when they choose a President, and suggested that Mr. Clinton did not pass the test. He asked the voters which President they would prefer in the event of an international crisis.

As for Mr. Clinton, at one point he looked at Mr. Bush and said: "I'm not interested in his character. I want to change the character of the Presidency." Little New Ground

But in general, it was a night that broke little new substantive ground and offered Mr. Bush few opportunities for the dramatic strokes that his strategists think he needs to come back from a clear deficit in the public opinion polls.

Mr. Clinton, for his part, seemed clearly content to avoid confrontations and follow a no-risk strategy befitting a front-runner. He pointedly turned away from opportunities to respond to Mr. Bush's probing attacks on his character and to take on the President over his handling of Iraq.

The 90-minute debate, held on the campus of the University of Richmond, opened the candidates to questions from an audience of 209 people selected by the Gallup Organization to represent uncommitted voters. Carole Simpson, of ABC News, was the moderator. The questioners were relentlessly focused on issues, from gun control to free trade, from health care to urban woes.

The unusual format, with the candidates occasionally perched on stools and occasionally wandering the stage like talk show hosts, made for a far less confrontational debate than might have been expected, given the tenor of the campaign dialogue in recent days.

More than once, members of the audience gently chided the candidates for not sticking to the issues this year.

Still, Mr. Bush again assailed Mr. Clinton as a man who habitually straddled the issues. He also took pains to answer Mr. Clinton's attack of Sunday night's debate, in which the Democrat pointedly noted that Mr. Bush's father, Senator Prescott Bush, had been a leading critic of Senator Joseph R. McCarthy. Democrats have accused the Republicans of practicing McCarthyite tactics against Mr. Clinton.

Mr. Bush's reply last night suggested that the allusion to his father had nagged him. "I remember something my Dad told me," Mr. Bush said. "I was 18 years old, going to Penn Station to go on into the Navy, and he said, 'write your mother,' which I faithfully did; he said 'serve your country,' -- my father was an honor, duty and country man -- and he said, 'tell the truth.' And I've tried to do that in public life, all through it. That says something about character."

Despite the occasional personal jab, the debate was dominated by domestic concerns. The only question on foreign policy came more than an hour into the debate, and it was a general inquiry about how the country should participate in the "new world order."

The candidates agreed that the United States should remain an international superpower. Mr. Bush tied the collapse of Communism to steady Republican stewardship, while Mr. Clinton and Mr. Perot insisted that the nation had to improve economically to maintain its strength internationally.

Mr. Perot, who was widely considered the winner of the first debate, spoke mostly in generalities last night. While he consistently contended that ridding the country of its huge deficit was crucial, he did not use the forum to advance his package of austere tax increases and spending cuts.

Mr. Perot tried to distinguish himself from his rivals on trade, lambasting what he asserted was a government that failed to look after the interests of the home front when trade agreements were negotiated.

Mr. Bush countered that the nation's economic problems would be much worse without strong exports. "Free and fair trade is the answer, not protection," he said.

Mr. Clinton sounded a similar theme, arguing, "The trick is to expand our export base and to expand trade on terms that are fair to us." To do that, he said, requires making sure that markets in other countries are as open to the United States as America is to foreign products, and changing the tax code to insure that it encourages investment at home.

On the subject of the deficit, the candidates were asked to detail how much they would reduce it in four years and whether they would promise not to seek re-election if they failed.

Governor Clinton said he would not make such a promise, warning that overly drastic measures would harm the economy. Instead, he said he would work to cut the deficit in half in his first term, which he contended would still allow for measures to spur economic growth.

Mr. Bush countered, "I don't see how you can grow the deficit down by increasing taxes."

Mr. Perot, who said he did not plan to seek re-election, repeated his pledge to make cutting the deficit a priority and charged that the two major parties had proved themselves unable to deal with it.

Several questioners expressed disgust at what they said was the mudslinging tone of the campaign and asked the candidates to discuss national issues rather than dwelling on character questions.

Mr. Perot said issues were exactly what he was trying to talk about, noting that he had bought 30-minute chunks of television advertising time to describe in detail his economic proposals. "Let's talk jobs, health care and crime," he said.

But Mr. Bush said "character is part of being President," as important to qualities of leadership as detailed programs. He accused Governor Clinton of starting the negative campaigning and said, "I'm not going to sit there being a punching bag."

He renewed his attack on Governor Clinton's involvement in Vietnam War protests while he was studying at Oxford University in England in the 1960's. He said he was "deeply troubled by someone who demonstrates and organizes demonstrations against his government in a foreign country." Is It a Generation Gap?

"Maybe that's generational," he said.

Mr. Clinton, responding briefly, said he was disheartened by "the tenor and tone of this campaign."

Mr. Bush defended his domestic accomplishments throughout the night. For example, he said he supported one questioner's call for doing more to rebuild the cities and the nation's roads, bridges and water systems. He said that this year the Government passed the "furthest looking transportation bill in the history of this country since Eisenhower started the interstate highway program." The President also defended his call for enterprise zones to help revive the nation's inner cities. He said he was frustrated at the difficulty in getting such a proposal through Congress, but acknowledged that he had threatened to veto the bill that provided tax breaks for investments in poor urban areas. Motives for Veto

He said he objected to other provisions of the bill added by Democrats in Congress and used the discussion to appeal anew for a line-item veto. If he had that, he said, "we could knock out the pork, knock out the tax increases and do what the people want us to do, create enterprise zones."

But Mr. Clinton quickly retorted that the real reason Mr. Bush wanted to veto the bill, which included several tax increases that Mr. Bush opposed, was because it "asks the wealthy to pay a little more." Sensitive to charges of dirty campaigning made by some in the audience, Mr. Clinton insisted that his charge was not "mudslinging but fact-slinging."

All three candidates tried to tread lightly on the politically perilous ground of gun control. Governor Clinton said that while he supported the right of people to keep arms, he supported a bill in Congress that would require people seeking to buy guns to submit to a waiting period while their backgrounds could be checked for mental illness or criminal records.

Mr. Bush said he opposed the gun-control bill, named for James Brady, the former White House press secretary who was severely wounded in the attempted assassination of President Ronald Reagan in 1981.

President Bush said, "I was not for the bill because it was not tough enough on criminals."

Mr. Perot called the Brady bill "a timid step in the right direction."

The candidates split three ways on the question whether members of Congress should be subject to term limitations.

"I strongly support term limits," said President Bush, staking out ground taken by most Republicans in the Democrat-controlled Congress. He said he believed "this would return government closer to the people." Merits of Term Limits

Mr. Clinton said term limits "may be popular, but I am against them." He said they would "pose a lot of problems for little states" and "would increase the influence of staff members -- people who were never elected."

Mr. Perot responded: "I intend to be there one term. I don't want to spend one day thinking about re-election. I will take absolutely no compensation.

"The point is we have got to reform government. If you don't reform government, term limits won't help."

On the issue of health care, Mr. Clinton reiterated his promise to produce a national health-care plan in the first 100 days of his Presidency. Mr. Bush said a leading factor driving up health costs was malpractice suits. "They're breaking the system," he said, noting they cost more than $20 billion a year. "I want to see those outrageous claims capped."

He said he wanted to make insurance available to the poor and to allow Americans to take their health-care policies with them when they leave their jobs.

The questioners sometimes seemed to unsettle the candidates. Mr. Bush took umbrage with what he saw as the premise of a woman who asked how each of the candidates had been personally affected by the national debt. He said she seemed to be suggesting that people of means were untouched by it. "I don't think it's fair to say that if you haven't had cancer, therefore you don't know what it's like," he said.

"You ought to be in the White House for a day, hear what I hear, see what I see, the mail I read," he said. "Everybody's affected by debt. Everything is more expensive. Everything comes out of your pocket and my pocket."

Mr. Perot said his decision to enter the Presidential race, disrupting his private life and business, was evidence of his deep concern with the debt. Economic Woes Discussed

Mr. Clinton used this moment to make an impassioned case for his commitment and his closeness to the nation's economic woes. He said that as Governor of Arkansas for 12 years, and as a candidate over these past two years, he had seen the troubled economy and its toll up close. "When a factory closes, I know the people who ran it," he said. "For the last 13 months, I've been meeting with people like you all over America, who have lost their livelihoods, their jobs, their health insurance."

But he told the questioner that the deficit was not the only cause of these problems, citing a lack of investment in America's people and years of what he called trickle-down economics. "We're in the grip of a failed economic theory," he said. "And this election better be about what kind of economic theory you want."
