In the long-awaited first debate of the 1992 Presidential campaign, with his Presidency in jeopardy, George Bush asked the American people last night for more time to right the economy, but his economic stewardship drew withering fire from Bill Clinton and Ross Perot.

White House officials said later that if he was re-elected Mr. Bush planned to dismiss his three top economic advisers, as demanded for months by Republican conservatives outraged over tax increases. They are Nicholas F. Brady, the Treasury Secretary; Richard G. Darman, the budget director, and Michael J. Boskin, the top White House economist.

Trailing badly in the national polls and in most big states, the President promised to make James A. Baker 3d, the former Secretary of State who now heads his campaign, the overseer of all domestic programs once Election Day had passed. It was an effort to suggest that he understood the urgency of American economic problems, something many voters doubt, but it also suggested that Mr. Baker, not Mr. Bush, was the man who gets things done. Renews Attack on Clinton

"Jim Baker is going to put together the economic program for the President," said Marlin Fitzwater, the White House spokesman. "That means we'll be getting a new economic team."

Focusing on foreign policy, the President depicted himself as the only candidate with enough experience to handle the pressures of the Oval Office, and he questioned the "judgment and character" of Mr. Clinton, his Democratic rival. [ Transcript, pages A14-A17. ]

He renewed his attacks on Mr. Clinton's role in antiwar demonstrations abroad during the Vietnam era, contending that the Democrat's actions raised grave questions about his fitness to serve as Commander in Chief.

Mr. Clinton, mild-mannered in most exchanges, answered sharply, accusing Mr. Bush of unfairly maligning his patriotism. He recalled the unsubstantiated charges of the late Joseph R. McCarthy and pointedly reminded the President that his father, the late Senator Prescott Bush of Connecticut, had been one of McCarthy's early foes. A Vivid Perot

During the debate, held at Washington University in the St. Louis suburb of Clayton, Mo., and televised nationally, Mr. Bush sought to identify Governor Clinton of Arkansas, his Democratic opponent, with the liberals whose economic programs have proved unpopular with American voters in the past, like Walter F. Mondale, Michael S. Dukakis and Jimmy Carter.

Both the major-party nominees did their best to ignore Mr. Perot, their independent rival, but he was nevertheless a bright, sparky presence in the 90-minute debate, full of pithy one-liners and self-deprecation. He seemed to have a good time, making fun of his big ears, telling the audience he was "not playing Lawrence Welk music tonight" and responding, when Mr. Bush touted his Presidential experience, that "I don't have any experience in running up a $4 trillion debt."

Mr. Perot may have gone some way toward regaining at least a bit of the credibility he lost when he abruptly walked away from the race in July. His vivid performance suggested what a power he might have been had he stayed in, but he had little specific to say except on his plan to help reduce the deficit by raising taxes on gasoline by 50 cents over five years. President on Defensive

Mr. Bush was forced onto the defensive much of the time on economic questions, but he fought back. He produced no new proposals other than still another job for Mr. Baker, who was brought to the campaign when it faltered but has not yet turned it around. Still, his answers were better focused than on many recent questions, and he spoke with verve and authority at times.

For his part, Mr. Clinton managed to tame his tendency to sound like a political-science professor with abstruse, over-detailed answers. He deftly turned a question about family values, a phrase the Republicans have used to try to split the Democratic coalition, into an indictment of the President's vetoes of Democratic bills intended to help younger workers.

Mr. Bush defended the status quo on several subjects, from American troop commitments in Europe to spending on AIDS research, while Mr. Clinton and Mr. Perot consistently called for basic revisions in American policies. On the economy especially, the President's insistent optimism left him open to the others' charges that he was complacent and out of touch with the nation.

His intentions with regard to Mr. Brady, Mr. Darman and Mr. Boskin were revealed after the debate, as Republican and Democratic officials emerged to provide reporters with interpretation favorable to their candidates. Some saw the move as a sign of desperation, others as an indication that the President realized he had sounded too complacent about the economy. No Big Gaffes

There appeared to be no major gaffes and no knockout punches. None of the three participants lost his composure or appeared stumped by the questions posed by Jim Lehrer, the moderator, and a panel of three other journalists. The questioners were Ann Compton of ABC News, John Mashek of The Boston Globe, and Sander Vanocur, a freelance television reporter.

If, on reflection, the American electorate decides that the debate was essentially a draw, Mr. Clinton would presumably benefit most. His goal last night was to enable his momentum to roll on, while Mr. Bush and Mr. Perot, trailing, hoped to transform the last three weeks of the campaign.

Three more debates remain, all like the first sponsored by the Commission on Presidential Debates. Mr. Bush, Mr. Perot and Mr. Clinton have agreed to square off in Richmond, Va., on Thursday and in East Lansing, Mich., next Monday. Vice President Dan Quayle and his rivals, Senator Al Gore and Adm. James B. Stockdale, are to debate in Atlanta on Tuesday.

Each debate will have a different format, negotiated by the Bush and Clinton campaigns after weeks of argument. Last night's allowed for no follow-up questions and no questioning by the candidates of each other. It was, in fact, not really a debate, but more a joint television interview, with the order of candidates' response determined by lot.

The President's attack on Mr. Clinton's antiwar activities while he was a student at Oxford University two decades ago was part of a concerted Republican effort, so far unsuccessful, to demonstrate that the Arkansas Governor is too slippery for the Presidency.

"It is wrong to demonstrate against your country on foreign soil," said Mr. Bush, who contrasted his service as a carrier-based pilot during World War II with Mr. Clinton's antiwar activities. "It's a question of character and judgment. I couldn't do that. I don't think most Americans could do that."

Mr. Clinton said with asperity, "We need a President to bring this country together, not divide it." Defining the Difference

In television commercials that were broadcast just before the debate, the Republicans took the same tack in assailing the Democratic nominee's explanations of his attempts to avoid service in Vietnam. In the spots, which will run for several days, an announcer says: "The question then was avoiding the draft. Now, for Bill Clinton, it's a question of avoiding the truth."

The debate opened with the candidates stating what set them apart from the others. Mr. Perot said his was the only campaign initiated by the public. Mr. Clinton said he alone represented change, and told Mr. Bush, "For 12 years, you've had it your way, and it didn't work." Mr. Bush cited experience.

In closing statements, Mr. Perot and Mr. Clinton broke little ground. But Mr. Bush talked of the difficulty of making decisions in the Oval Office and, in a slap at Mr. Clinton, said a President could not oscillate between positions. Not surprisingly, he dwelt on his foreign, not domestic, record.

Twice, with great emphasis, he said, 'I hope I've earned your trust," and added that "a lot of being President is about trust and character." On Taxing and Spending

A question about taxes to Governor Clinton afforded each candidate a chance to present his broad economic themes in phrases that have become familiar throughout the campaign.

The Governor said his program would increase taxes for families earning more than $200,000. "These are the people who had their incomes go up while their taxes went down" during two Republican Administrations, Mr. Clinton said.

"We've got to have no more trickle down," he said, "no more tax cuts for the wealthy for nothing."

Mr. Perot said that as President he would make it clear that the United States would have to enter "a period of shared sacrifice."

"We've created a mess, and we don't have much to show for it," he added. Shrinking the Military

The candidates demonstrated contrasting approaches to shrinking the military when asked how many American troops should be stationed in Europe.

Mr. Bush replied broadly, asserting that a sizable force is needed to keep the peace, while Mr. Perot and Mr. Clinton said deeper cuts in troop levels were needed to save money and because European countries were wealthy enough to pay a bigger share of the bill.

Mr. Perot said the United States cannot afford heavy continued spending on troops in Europe, with countries like Germany able to pay a much larger share.

Mr. Clinton was the only candidate to discuss numbers. He said a force of 100,000 troops would be adequate, not the 150,000-troop limit set by Mr. Bush. He said new priorities would redirect military spending and planning in the post-cold war world, with factors like mobility becoming more important than large ground forces.

Asked about the fairness of his proposal to raise gasoline taxes by 50 cents a gallon, Mr. Perot said it would not, as the questioner suggested, punish the middle class. "I know it's not popular," Mr. Perot said. He said higher gas taxes are needed because "it's time to pay the fiddler, and if we don't we'll be spending our children's money."

Mr. Bush said, "I don't believe it's fair to slap a tax on people who have to drive for a living, people who have to go long distances." Bush Espouses Optimism

Throughout the debate, Mr. Bush repeatedly sought to strike an optimistic note about the economy, a feel-good approach reminiscent of former President Ronald Reagan.

"We've got big problems, but we are not coming apart at the seams," he said in response to a question proposed by a retired worker from the McDonnell Douglas Corporation about whether the United States should have an industrial plan to convert from the cold war to a new era.

Governor Clinton, on the other hand, said the Administration was responsible for not responding to the changing economy.

"There are 200,000 people unemployed in California alone," Mr. Clinton said, adding that many of them had lost their jobs because there had been no plan to compensate for declining military spending." After the Cold War

Mr. Clinton and Mr. Perot offered similar visions of the nation's post- cold war needs: to rebuild the country's financial strength, reduce the former superpowers' nuclear arsenals and help promote democratic societies, especially in the Soviet Union.

"If you're not rich, you're not a superpower," Mr. Perot said. "And you can't convert from potato chips to airplanes in an emergency."

Mr. Bush seemed to bristle at the notion, implicit in his opponents' advocacy of stern measures on the economy, that America was in decline.

"We are still the envy of the world," he said, "even in terms of our economy." He added: "We've got the best military, and it's keeping the peace. We said peace through strength and it worked. The cold war is over."
