The last of the three Presidential debates ended last night with President Bush still on the defensive about his first-term record and laboring to revive his campaign by warning that Gov. Bill Clinton lacked the leadership, the record and the character to be President.

In their most spirited, direct exchange yet, Mr. Bush assailed Mr. Clinton's record in Arkansas, his economic proposals and what Mr. Bush asserted was a habit of trying to have it both ways on issue after issue.

Mr. Clinton, responding to the President's attacks, hammered Mr. Bush's economic stewardship and resurrected his broken pledge from 1988: "I really can't believe Mr. Bush is still trying to make trust an issue after 'read my lips.' " Focus on Iraq Conflict

The Democratic Governor also joined with Ross Perot, the independent candidate, in opening a withering critique of Mr. Bush's handling of events leading to the conflict with Iraq.

Mr. Bush, who entered this debate with a clear and persistent deficit in public opinion polls, gave his most aggressive performance yet but did not appear to deliver the devastating blow to Mr. Clinton that Republicans had hoped for. [ Transcript, pages A20-A23. ]

Mr. Bush contended, repeatedly, that Mr. Clinton was a throwback to Democratic big-government and tax-and-spend policies that were abhorrent to the voters. "Mr. and Mrs. America, when you hear him say we're going to tax only the rich, watch your wallet because his figures don't add up, and he's going to sock it right to the middle-class taxpayer and lower, if he's going to pay for all the spending programs he proposes," Mr. Bush declared. Bush Chided on Baker

In one of the sharpest exchanges of the evening, Mr. Clinton criticized the President for initially saying that James A. Baker 3d, the White House chief of staff and former Secretary of State, would return to the foreign-policy post and days later saying that Mr. Baker would be in charge of the economy.

"I'll make some news in the third debate," Mr. Clinton said. "The person responsible for economic policy in my administration will be Bill Clinton."

Mr. Bush responded hotly: "That's what worries me. He's going to be responsible."

And striking a persistent theme from last night -- reminiscent of the Republican attack against Gov. Michael S. Dukakis in 1988 -- he added that Mr. Clinton "would do for the United States what he's done to Arkansas." Defending His State

That remark prompted Mr. Clinton to interrupt "to defend the honor of my state" and defend his record.

But Mr. Clinton also delivered a biting critique of Mr. Bush's economic stewardship, saying that the President's "trickle-down economics" had been a failure. He defended his accomplishments as Governor and presented himself repeatedly as a man committed to easing the lot of the middle class.

"We're a low-spending, low-tax-burden" state, he said. "We dramatically increased investment, and our jobs are growing. I wish America had had that record."

In a sharp response to Mr. Bush's assertion that he had repeatedly waffled on important issues, Mr. Clinton reminded the national television audience that Mr. Bush had once described Ronald Reagan's economic proposals as "voodoo economics" only to embrace them when he joined the ticket in 1980. Direct Attacks Avoided

Both Mr. Bush and Mr. Clinton avoided direct attacks on Mr. Perot, reflecting the belief of strategists in both camps that many of the Texas billionaire's supporters would drift away in the final days and be up for grabs.

And Mr. Perot, who remains mired in a distant third place in the public opinion polls, used his closing statement to urge voters to disregard the pundits who say he is not electable.

"You got to stop letting these people tell you who to vote for," he said. "You got to stop letting these folks in the press tell you you're throwing your vote away."

Mr. Perot also returned to one of his strongest appeals. "Who would you give your pension fund and your savings account to to manage?" he asked.

A CBS News Poll of 553 registered voters taken immediately after the debate found the race virtually unchanged since the previous CBS Poll taken over the weekend. The new poll, with a margin of sampling error of plus or minus five percentage points, found Mr. Clinton with 48 percent, Mr. Bush with 33 percent and Mr. Perot with 16 percent. Attacked on Strong Suit

The third and final debate, held at Michigan State University in East Lansing, and moderated by Jim Lehrer of PBS, was the first in which the candidates had energetically squared off on a foreign-policy issue, and it came on a subject that Mr. Bush's camp had long considered a strong point: the Persian Gulf war.

Mr. Perot maintained that Mr. Bush had given the Iraqi President, Saddam Hussein, a green light to seize the Kuwaiti oil fields just across the border from Iraq. Mr. Bush interrupted to "defend the national honor" and denied Mr. Perot's accusation.

But most of the skirmishing of the night occurred around taxes: the subtext was Mr. Bush's attempt to box Mr. Clinton in as a tax-and-spend liberal and Mr. Clinton's attempt to cast his proposals as a third way between traditional Democratic and Republican economic philosophies.

Mr. Clinton maintained that he would limit any tax increases to the very wealthy, flatly asserting, "I will not raise taxes on the middle class to pay for these programs." But he refused a questioner's invitation to pledge to forswear, under any condition, tax increases on the middle class. "I am not going to tell you, 'Read my lips,' " he said. "I can't tell you what emergencies are going to develop."

Mr. Bush, in his case against Mr. Clinton, emphasized the Democratic challenger's draft record less than he has in previous encounters. But he repeatedly tried to connect Mr. Clinton with the high inflation and high-interest rates of the Carter Administration.

"We remember what it was like when we had a spending President and a spending Congress and interest rates -- who remembers that? -- they were at 21.5 percent under Jimmy Carter and inflation was 15," Mr. Bush said. "We don't want to go back to that."

At one point in the debate, Mr. Clinton tried to turn one of Mr. Bush's favorite issues against him, saying, "He is the person who raised taxes on the middle class."

Mr. Bush responded, "I think everybody's paying too much taxes." Focus on Arkansas

In their most spirited, direct exchange yet, Mr. Bush assailed Mr. Clinton's record in Arkansas. He carefully prefaced his critique by saying, "It's not dirty campaigning" to take a hard look at the Democrat's state and asserted, "Arkansas is doing very, very badly against any standard."

Mr. Clinton responded by reciting his litany of accomplishments as Governor, including a rating that put Arkansas No. 1 in the creation of jobs in the last year.

The exchange led to the evening's first laughter as Mr. Perot made his contribution to the discussion. "I grew up five blocks from Arkansas," the Texas entrepreneur said. "It's a beautiful state." But he said it was also so small and atypical that "it's irrelevant," and compared the leap from its governorship to the Presidency to the difference between running a corner grocery and running Wal-Mart.

The state's Governor took offense. "I think it is highly relevant," Mr. Clinton said. "I think it's been pretty impressive." Bush Objects to Question

Mr. Bush was on the defensive when Mr. Lehrer asked whether he ignored domestic problems like race and health care until they became crises. "I don't think that's a fair shot," the President said.

Mr. Bush also took pains to blame Congress for frustrating the promise of his domestic proposals. Mr. Clinton tried to present himself as a man who would enter office with a brisk, 100-days agenda for domestic needs.

The President suggested that voters look back at the last time there was a Democrat in the White House.

"The misery index went right through the roof," he said. "Remember the question, 'are you better off?' " Mr. Bush asked. "Well, is a home buyer better off because he can refinance a home because interest rates are down? Is the senior citizen better off because inflation is not wiping out their family's savings? I think they are.

"Is the guy out of work better off? Of course he's not, but he's not going to be better off if we grow the government, if we invest, as Governor Clinton says, invest in more government."

Mr. Perot also bridled at a question from Mr. Lehrer, who asked whether he was a perennial quitter. As evidence of his commitment, he said, he would spend more than $60 million of his own money on the campaign.

"I'm here tonight, folks," he added. "When you asked me to come back in, I came back in. I've put my wallet on the table for you and your children."

The candidates clashed on the North American Free Trade Agreement, a pact reached by the United States, Mexico and Canada. Mr. Bush accused Mr. Clinton of straddling the fence on the issue after Mr. Perot condemned the agreement, which awaits Congressional approval.

The draft issue arose in the second half of the debate, when the questioning was done by a panel of reporters: Helen Thomas of United Press International, Gene Gibbons of Reuters and Susan Rook of CNN. Suspicions Over 1990

Mr. Clinton said his decision in 1969 to avoid the draft was not a mistake and would not affect his ability to command the armed services. But he also acknowledged that he had not adequately handled the questions that surfaced about how he had avoided military service.

"If I had it to do over again, I might have answered the questions a little better," he said.

During a round of questions about whether more women should serve in high government positions, Mr. Perot said the Bush Administration had withheld information about whether the American Ambassador in Baghdad, April C. Glaspie, had encouraged Saddam Hussein to invade Kuwait in the summer of 1990.

"We told him you can take the northern part of Kuwait," Mr. Perot said.

Mr. Bush interjected angrily, "We did not say to Saddam Hussein, Ross, that you can take the northern part of Kuwait."

In response to criticism from Mr. Perot, Mr. Bush strongly defended his decision to reach out to Iraq in the years before the war in the Persian Gulf. He repeated his assertion that offering loan guarantees and other assistance to Mr. Hussein was part of an effort, albeit a failed one, to bring Iraq into the "family of nations."

He portrayed the growing scandal over United States-Iraqi relations as politically motivated and fomented by Democratic members of Congress who had initially supported his overtures to that country.

Mr. Clinton praised the President for his leadership during the Gulf war. But he said the Administration had gone too far in courting a dangerous dictator.
