In their final confrontation before the nation's voters last night, Vice President Al Gore cited accomplishments throughout his public career as evidence that he is a champion of working Americans, while Gov. George W. Bush cast himself as a leader from outside Washington with a record of uniting Republicans and Democrats.

The candidates recalibrated their approaches from the first two debates as they prowled a red-carpeted stage at Washington University in St. Louis and fielded questions from ordinary voters. Mr. Gore, who had been criticized even by his own supporters as too brash in the first debate and too restrained in the second, was newly feisty but stopped himself from appearing too combative.

Mr. Bush, who seemed to have less to prove in this debate, adopted a more earnest and often subdued demeanor as he tried to play the statesman.

Still, the 90-minute event was briskly paced and the exchanges were often spirited and intense. Whether the topic was education or the bloodshed in the Middle East or family farms, Mr. Gore often weaved in his experience in the White House and in Congress. In contrast to the debate last week, when the two men agreed more often than not, Mr. Gore repeatedly tried to underscore their differences.

''If you want someone who will fight for you,'' Mr. Gore said, ''and who will fight for the middle-class families and working men and women who are sick and tired of having their parents and grandparents pay higher prices for prescription drugs than anybody else, then I want to fight for you.''

Reaching back to his own record, he added, ''Listen, for 24 years I have never been afraid to take on the big drug companies.''

Mr. Bush sought use many of his answers as opportunities to portray the vice president as a big spender beholden to special interests.

''If this were a spending contest, I'd come in second,'' Mr. Bush said. At another point, he looked at his rival and sought to link Mr. Gore to liberals of the past, saying: ''He proposed more than Walter Mondale and Michael Dukakis combined. You know, this is a big spender. He is. And he ought to be proud of it. It's part of his record. We have a different philosophy.'' [Transcript, Page A26.]

For both candidates, the debate was pivotal because it was their last opportunity to make their pitches before a single audience of tens of millions of Americans in the tightest presidential contest in decades.

From here on out, the candidates, in seeking to touch voters, will have to rely on commercials and snippets on the news.

The event opened on a somber note, with a moment of silence for Gov. Mel Carnahan of Missouri, who was killed in a plane crash on Monday night. Mr. Carnahan, a Democrat, had been in a neck-and-neck race for the Senate with the incumbent, John Ashcroft. Mr. Gore canceled a rally in Kansas City on Wednesday, where he was to have stumped with Mr. Carnahan.

Mr. Carnahan's death so stunned the campaigns and the commission that puts on the debates that they discussed postponing the forum.

The most attention -- and perhaps pressure -- last night was on Mr. Gore, who is lagging just slightly in national surveys. His more aggressive posture seemed to fit his place in the race: as a slight underdog.

Mr. Gore's most brazen move came early on after Mr. Bush said he, too, favored a nationwide bill of rights for patients, and cited one he supported in Texas that he said demonstrated how he united Democrats and Republicans.

That prompted Mr. Gore to stride within inches of Mr. Bush with a challenge. He pressed him about why he did not favor the national rights bill sponsored by Representatives John D. Dingell, Democrat of Michigan, and Charlie Norwood, Republican of Georgia.

Mr. Bush appeared momentarily startled by the invasion of his space, which was reminiscent of Representative Rick A. Lazio's confrontation of Hillary Clinton in their first Senate debate in New York. Mr. Bush responded by speaking of the differences in their approaches.

''I can get something positive done on behalf of the people,'' Mr. Bush said. ''That's what the question in this campaign is about.''

This debate was more free-wheeling than the first two, perhaps because the format was a town-meeting-style exchange, with the contenders approaching the audience as if they were trying to make their best case to a jury. The questions came from uncommitted voters chosen by the Gallup Organization. Jim Lehrer of PBS was the moderator.

Mr. Gore, who has conducted scores of town meetings since he was a House member from Tennessee -- and has promised to hold them regularly if he is elected president -- seemed particularly comfortable with the format and strolled about the stage. Mr. Bush at times stood awkwardly, and did not always seem to know what to do with his arms. But at other times he seemed at ease, and even winked at the audience as Mr. Gore was scolding him.

It is not likely that the debate last night -- or the previous two -- will be remembered for any catchy slogans or incidents. And while the final event had been viewed as climatic, viewership of the debates has been relatively small, particularly for so competitive a race.

The candidates had to compete with baseball, as the Yankees beat the Seattle Mariners in the deciding game of the American League playoffs. The forum also came as the presidential race has been largely crowded off the front pages by the bloodshed in the Middle East.

No candidate tossed a surprise or made a stunning pronouncement. Even so, Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore tried to seize opportunities to present different philosophies of how they would govern.

One of the more heated exchanges was over reducing the cost of prescription drugs. Mr. Bush said the elderly were entitled to government programs that encouraged health insurance plans to help with the costs of prescription drugs. Such programs cannot pass, Mr. Bush said, until there is change in Washington.

''There's a lot of bickering in Washington, D.C.,'' Mr. Bush said. ''It's kind of like a political issue as opposed to a people issue. So what I want to do is I want to call upon Republicans and Democrats to forget all the arguing and finger pointing and come together and take care of our seniors.''

But he said he was against government-imposed price controls on drugs. ''I think price controls would hurt our ability to continue important research and development,'' Mr. Bush said. ''The best thing is to reform Medicare.''

Mr. Gore responded harshly. ''Here we go again,'' he said, trying to depict Mr. Bush as too close to drug companies. Pointing to Mr. Bush, Mr. Gore said that for voters who wanted a candidate who ''supports legislation supported by the big drug companies, this is your man.''

The two also tangled over a national health care program. Mr. Gore said the country should move ''step by step toward universal health coverage.'' But he said he did not favor the government as the sole provider.

''We have a big difference on this,'' he said, turning to Mr. Bush.

The governor agreed.

''I am absolutely opposed to a national health care plan,'' Mr. Bush said. ''I don't want the federal government making decisions for patients or providers.''

In the last debate, Mr. Bush was criticized by some people for appearing to grin briefly when he talked about death penalty cases. Responding to a question last night, he said he was not proud of the fact that Texas had imposed the death penalty on more people than any other state in recent years. ''The death penalty is very serious business,'' he said.

But, Mr. Bush said, the death penalty is appropriate when a defendant is guilty of a capital crime and has had full access to the courts.

While not boasting of the number of executions, Mr. Bush said: ''I'm proud of the fact that violent crime is down in the state of Texas.''

Mr. Gore said he supported the death penalty ''in the most heinous cases.'' But, he said, it has to be administered fairly, with attention to DNA evidence.

Mr. Bush was perhaps most passionate when he discussed education, an issue he has devoted much time to as governor. Asked how he would get parents more involved in the education of their children, he said, ''It's hard to make people love one another.''

The governor said, ''Each of us must love our children with all our heart and all our soul,'' but he added that he did not know of any law that could guarantee that.

Mr. Gore said he would offer hiring bonuses to help schools hire 100,000 teachers in the next four years. He said he would work for universal preschool programs. And he said Mr. Bush supported vouchers that could be used by parents to send their children to public or private schools.

Such vouchers would take money from public schools, Mr. Gore said.

''Governor Bush is for vouchers,'' Mr. Gore said, ''and in his plan, he proposes to drain more money, more taxpayer money, out of the public schools for private school vouchers than all of the money that he proposes in his entire budget for public schools themselves.''

A question from a high school teacher about the federal role in schools quickly produced another scene in the candidates' familiar debate about tax policy.

Mr. Gore offered his remedies about how to improve schools but turned the issue to Mr. Bush's tax proposals. He said that Mr. Bush's tax-cut plan would make it difficult for the federal government to provide any increased aid to schools.

''He proposes spending more money for the wealthiest 1 percent than he does spending on education, health and national defense combined,'' Mr. Gore said.

Mr. Bush replied that under his plan, the wealthiest taxpayers would pay 64 percent of the total tax payment, compared with 62 percent that he asserted they now pay.

''This is a fair plan,'' Mr. Bush said. Gesturing at Mr. Gore, he said, ''This is a big spender.''

When Mr. Gore said that independent journalistic analyses showed that his evaluation of the Bush tax plan was correct, Mr. Bush dismissed journalists as irrelevant. Mr. Gore said they were the ''keepers of the record'' of what was accurate.

''If you want a man emphasizing tax cuts mainly for the wealthy, here is your man,'' he said turning to Mr. Bush. ''But if you want someone to fight for the middle class,'' he said, choose the Gore-Lieberman ticket.

The debate veered to foreign policy when Mr. Bush was asked what would make him the best leader to deal with the Middle East.

''I've been a leader, a person who has to set a clear vision and convince people to follow,'' the governor replied, adding that he had a strategy for the Middle East.

In the absence of further elaboration, Mr. Bush said the United States had to be ''credible, strong.''

''Israel's our friend,'' Mr. Bush said, quickly adding that he would reach out to Arab nations also. Whatever he did, Mr. Bush said, he would do with an eye on what is right, not what is popular at the moment.

For his part, Mr. Gore said he envisioned ''a future when the world is at peace, with the United States of America promoting values of democracy and human rights and freedom all around the world.''

When a mother in the audience asked how the candidates felt about the idea that the nation's popular culture was making it more difficult to rear children, both men noted they were fathers and that allowed them to appreciate the issue. And they issued tough words for Hollywood.

Mr. Bush said that ''government ought to stand on the side of parents teaching their children right from wrong and the message is often undermined by pop culture. We can work with the entertainment on things like family hour.''

Mr. Gore recalled how his wife, Tipper, who was in the audience, once discovered that one of their daughters brought home a record with lyrics he described as awful and she ''hit the ceiling.'' He noted that Mrs. Gore then began a successful campaign to have records labeled for content.

When a sixth-grade teacher said his students wanted him to ask the candidates if they would keep their pledges, Mr. Gore said, ''Yes,'' producing a ripple of laughter at his terseness. But it was only momentary as he added: ''I am a person who keeps promises and you know we've heard a lot about not being done much in the last eight years. I think the record shows otherwise.''

He then reeled off promises of his own. ''I will balance the budget every year, I will pay down the debt every year, I will give middle class America tax cuts, meaningful ones and I will invest in education, health care and social security.''

Mr. Bush quickly picked up that theme, saying that the Clinton-Gore administration had promised many things. ''You were promised that Medicare would be reformed,'' he said. In addition, he said that there were promises to reform social security and provide a tax cut for the middle class. ''It didn't happen,'' he said.
