LEAD: Vice President Bush and Gov. Michael S. Dukakis quarreled last night over which of them was responsible for the shrill tone of the Presidential campaign, while trading sharp words on Social Security, abortion, military policy and the basic values that each would bring to the White House.

Vice President Bush and Gov. Michael S. Dukakis quarreled last night over which of them was responsible for the shrill tone of the Presidential campaign, while trading sharp words on Social Security, abortion, military policy and the basic values that each would bring to the White House.

Biting exchanges marked this second and last Presidential debate of the 1988 election, but each candidate also sought to show a softer side and expressed concern about the bruising nature of the campaign.

''It's gotten a little ugly out there,'' Mr. Bush said. ''It's gotten a little nasty.'' [ Transcript, page A14. ] Dukakis Cites 'Labels'

Mr. Dukakis accused the Vice President of lowering the level of their dialogue by persisting in using ''labels,'' especially the word ''liberal,'' to refer to the Massachusetts Governor.

''If I had a dollar, George, for every time you've used that label, I'd qualify for one of those tax breaks for the rich you want to give away,'' he said.

But Mr. Bush said it was the Democrats who had initiated a negative campaign, with the attacks against him at their Atlanta convention three months ago. Big Test for Dukakis

The nationally broadcast 90-minute debate, held at the University of California at Los Angeles, was important for both men, but especially so for Mr. Dukakis. Mr. Bush has enjoyed a modest but persistent margin over the Governor in the national polls ever since the Republican National Convention in August. And he is even farther ahead by almost all estimates, including those of Democrats, in the battle for electoral votes.

So, in the eyes of his supporters, Mr. Dukakis needed an especially strong performance. He responded by displaying a command of issues and details, as he had in the first debate, on Sept. 25, and sought to convey more personal warmth than he had then.

''I think I'm a reasonably likable guy,'' Mr. Dukakis said. ''But I'm also a serious guy. I think the Presidency of the United States is a very serious office.''

For his part, Mr. Bush, seemingly more assured than in the first debate, avoided the sort of major misstep that might have derailed his candidacy.

He appeared at ease, occasionally going to some lengths to project joviality, as when he bantered with the panel of journalists who questioned the candidates: Bernard Shaw of the Cable News Network, the moderator; Ann Compton of ABC News; Andrea Mitchell of NBC News, and Margaret Garrard Warner of Newsweek magazine.

Mr. Bush also seemed ready to take advantage of openings presented by off-beat questions. For example, when asked to identify to identify his personal heroes, he named some, including Jaime Escalante, a Los Angeles mathematics teacher whose story was featured in the movie ''Stand and Deliver.'' Mr. Dukakis, for his part, mostly generalized about the kinds of people he admired. Response of Campaigns

The Vice President's aides seemed more pleased after the debate than did Mr. Dukakis's.

''It was a clear win,'' said Richard G. Darman, a Bush adviser. ''We are very, very happy.''

More modestly, Ron Brown, a senior campaign adviser to Mr. Dukakis, described the debates as ''stepping stones,'' and added, ''The more the American people get to know Mr. Dukakis, the more comfort there'll be.'' No More Debates

Mr. Bush, who seems in the stronger position as the campaign enters its final stage, pointedly rejected a panelist's suggestion that he agree to another debate. He said Americans were ''up to here with debates.''

During the encounter, each candidate sought repeatedly to turn the discussion to the issues he sees as strengthening him: Mr. Dukakis returned over and over to Social Security, for example, and Mr. Bush to national defense.

But, despite their expressed desire to run a gentler campaign, they sparred fiercely over a broad range of questions, including whether Senator Dan Quayle of Indiana, Mr. Bush's running mate, had the ability to handle the Presidency, and which nominee could be trusted to protect Social Security.

''I made a good selection,'' Mr. Bush said of Mr. Quayle. ''I have confidence in him.'' Mr. Bush argued that the Senator, whose standing in the polls is very low, had taken ''an unfair pounding.''

But Mr. Dukakis retorted, ''Mr. Bush picked Dan Quayle, and before he did, he said: 'Watch my choice for Vice President. It will tell all.' ''It sure did,'' Mr. Dukakis added. In arguing over the causes of what both nominees agreed was the uninspiring state of campaign discourse, they placed the blame on each other and, in Mr. Bush's case, on the press and television as well. Gone Fishing

Mr. Bush said he was pleased that he had chosen to go on a fishing trip with James A. Baker 3d, who later became his campaign chairman, rather than listen to the Democratic National Convention in July.

''Thank God I was up with Jimmy Baker, camping out, and I didn't have to hear all the personal attacks on me at that Democratic convention,'' Mr. Bush said. ''It was wonderful not to have to listen to it.''

But Mr. Dukakis said it was Mr. Bush's attempts to label him a liberal that had brought the level of the campaign down.

''I don't think these labels mean a thing,'' Mr. Dukakis said, ''and I would hope that tonight, and in the course of the rest of the campaign, we can have our good, solid disagreements on issues.''

Late in the debate, Mr. Bush argued intensely that one key reason the campaign seemed so negative was that the press and television seemed less interested in reporting the issues, which he said both nominees had addressed in detail, than in covering their charges and countercharges and the results of opinion polls.

The messages the two candidates were trying to convey seemed clear throughout the encounter, and they kept returning to them whenever they found the opportunity. Dukakis's Theme

Mr. Dukakis attempted to cast Mr. Bush as an indecisive leader who had changed his position on many issues. The Governor argued that Mr. Bush represented the status quo, and urged all who wanted change to vote Democratic.

''Our opponents,'' Mr. Dukakis asserted in his closing remarks, ''say, 'Things are O.K., don't rock the boat, not to worry.' They say we should be satisfied.

''But I don't think we can be satisfied when we're spending $150 billion a year in interest alone on the national debt, much of it going to foreign bankers, or when 25 percent of our high school students are dropping out of school.''

''We can do better than that,'' Mr. Dukakis concluded, ''not working with government alone, but with all of us working together.'' Peace and Prosperity

Mr. Bush, on the other hand, argued that voters should look to the economic achievements of the Reagan years, with ''the longest expansion in modern history,'' and above all to the Republicans' success in keeping the peace.

''This election is about big things, and perhaps the biggest is world peace,'' Mr. Bush declared in his summation. ''And I ask you to consider the experience I have had in working with a President who has revolutionized the situation around the world.

''America stands tall again, and, as a result, we are credible and we have now achieved a historic arms control agreement. I want to build on that.'' Attack Over Social Security

Mr. Dukakis, his eyes on the votes of tens of millions of Americans who are retired or near retirement age, attacked Mr. Bush for having cast a tiebreaking vote in the Senate to delay cost-of-living increases for Social Security recipients and said Republicans repeatedly looked to cuts in Social Security as a way to balance the Federal budget.

The Governor also repeated his frequent assertion that Mr. Bush's budget proposals suggested that he would have to ''raid'' the Social Security trust fund, a charge that the Vice President again dismissed.

Early in the debate, Mr. Bush sought to turn the Social Security issue around on Mr. Dukakis, saying that to balance the Massachusetts budget this year, the Governor had used $29 million from state pension funds.

''We didn't do that,'' Mr. Dukakis retorted angrily, adding that it was he who had made the state's pension system sound. The Abortion Question

As in the first debate, the nominees also argued about whether and under what circumstances abortion should be legal.

Asked whether it was consistent of him to support abortion in the case of rape or incest, but not when a child would be born severely handicapped, Mr. Bush spoke at length of the death of a very young daughter, who suffered from leukemia.

''I think human life is very, very precious,'' Mr. Bush said. ''This is where I'm coming from. And it is personal.''

Mr. Dukakis then spoke of a child of his who ''lived about 20 minutes after it was born.''

''But isn't the real question we have to answer not how many exceptions we make - because the Vice President himself is prepared to make exceptions - it's who makes the decision,'' Mr. Dukakis said. ''I would hope that we would give to women in this country the right to make that decision.'' Split on Military Policy

The debate offered viewers an equally clear look at the nominees' deep disagreements on military spending.

Mr. Dukakis argued that ''national security'' included economic security and asked, ''How can we build a strong American military that's teeter-tottering on a mountain of debt?''

He accused Mr. Bush of refusing to make choices among strategic weapon systems. The Democrat argued that some such systems had to be cut in order to balance the budget and leave money for improving America's conventional forces.

Mr. Bush, however, asserted that inasmuch as the Soviet Union was modernizing its nuclear deterrent, the United States needed to do so as well. He said Mr. Dukakis continually ''talks about limits'' and about ''what we can't do.''

The two men clashed on taxes as well.

The Governor asserted once more that the Vice President would be unable to keep his pledge not to increase taxes, and Mr. Bush challenged Mr. Dukakis's plan to collect billions of dollars in uncollected taxes as an effort to create an army of tax enforcers who would harrass average Americans.

''It's the Internal Revenue Service,'' Mr. Dukakis responded, ''which estimates that we aren't collecting $100 billion or more in taxes owed in this country. And that is just absolutely unfair to the vast majority of Americans, who pay their taxes and pay them on time.'' Difference in Style

The two men differed in style throughout the encounter. Mr. Dukakis, widely rated in the first debate as lacking warmth, sought a more relaxed appearance, and smiled frequently. But when he was asked to list those whom American children should regard as heroes, Mr. Dukakis seemed taken aback and listed general categories of people: doctors and scientists, classroom teachers, policemen and scientists.

Mr. Bush, who answered the question second and had more time to consider his response, replied quickly with the names of Jaime Escalante, the Hispanic educator; Frederick H. Hauck, the commanderr of the space shuttle Discovery, and Armando Valladeres, a Cuban released from a Communist prison who wrote of his experiences.

The Vice President, well aware that his political fortunes have been helped by President Reagan's resurgent popularity, concluded this way:

''I also think we ought to give a little credit to the President of the United States. He is the one that has gotten us that first arms control agreement.''

The moderator, Mr. Shaw, informed Mr. Bush that his time to answer the question was up, but Mr. Bush pressed on: ''And the cynics abounded. And he is leaving office with a popularity at an all-time high because American people say, 'He is our hero.' ''
