In a fiercely competitive conclusion to the presidential debates, President Bush and Senator John Kerry battled last night over the state of American health care, the strength of the economy and whether they would appoint Supreme Court justices who would uphold the right to abortion.

For 90 minutes in Tempe, Ariz., the two candidates displayed a stark contrast in their views of virtually every major domestic issue -- and particularly Mr. Bush's economic stewardship -- as they offered a blizzard of figures and statistics to try to make their cases.

Mr. Kerry, a Democrat from Massachusetts, repeatedly portrayed himself as a fiscally responsible leader running against a spendthrift president who had cut taxes for the wealthy while tolerating a profound decline for the American middle class.

''This is the first president in 72 years to preside over an economy in America that has lost jobs -- 1.6 million jobs,'' Mr. Kerry said. ''Eleven other presidents, six Democrats and five Republicans, had wars, had recessions, had great difficulties. None of them lost jobs the way this president has.'' [Transcript, Page A22.]

''This president has taken a $5.6 trillion surplus and turned it into deficits as far as the eye can see,'' Mr. Kerry said, adding, ''The American middle-class isn't making it right now.''

Mr. Bush, staring stonily at Mr. Kerry, repeatedly sought to portray his opponent as a liberal out of the political mainstream, twice comparing him to his fellow Democrat from Massachusetts, Senator Edward M. Kennedy. In particular, he warned that Mr. Kerry's health care plan was an ''empty promise'' that would cost $5 trillion over 10 years -- nearly eight times the estimate Mr. Kerry offered for his own plan.

''My opponent talks about fiscal sanity,'' Mr. Bush said. ''His record in the United States Senate does not match his rhetoric. He voted to increase taxes 98 times and to bust the budget 277 times.''

Mr. Bush, faced with the challenge of a debate that was supposed to be focused entirely on domestic issues -- after building his re-election campaign on national security -- cited a litany of events beyond his control as he sought to rebut the battery of economic statistics Mr. Kerry used against him.

''People need to remember, six months prior to my arrival the stock market started to go down, and it was one of the largest declines in our history,'' he said. ''And then we had a recession, and we got attacked, which cost us one million jobs. But we acted. I led the Congress. We passed tax relief. And now this economy's growing.''

This third and final debate, at Arizona State University, did not appear to have any dramatic moments that would sharply shift the dynamic of a race that most polls show has become dead even after Mr. Kerry's strong performances in their first two encounters. The two men were sharp and aggressive from the very first question, but both appeared more subdued than in their first two encounters; Mr. Kerry, though, seemed in command as he talked evenly into the cameras on subjects that his aides have long viewed as his strong suits.

In one of the more striking moments of the evening, Mr. Kerry pledged that he would not appoint anyone to the Supreme Court who would overturn the right to abortion. Mr. Bush, who is a strong opponent of abortion, and whose election strategy this year has emphasized turning out his conservative base, declined to answer a similar question from the moderator, Bob Schieffer of CBS News. Instead, he reverted to what he said when he first ran for president in 2000, by declaring he would not impose a ''litmus test'' on any judicial nomination.

''What he's asking me is, will I have a litmus test for my judges?'' he said. ''And the answer is no, I will not have a litmus test. I will pick judges who will interpret the Constitution, but I'll have no litmus tests.''

Mr. Kerry, who has been repeatedly taunted by Mr. Bush for waffling on key questions, cracked a smile.

''Well, again, the president didn't answer the question,'' he said. ''I'll answer it straight to America. I'm not going to appoint a judge to the court who's going to undo a constitutional right whether it's the First Amendment or the Fifth Amendment or some other right that's given under our courts today under the Constitution.''

There were two major domestic issues -- the environment and energy -- that did not come up.

In addition, the two men did not discuss Mr. Kerry's criticism of Mr. Bush's initiative to limit research using embryonic stem cells. Mr. Kerry made no mention of Christopher Reeve, the actor who died over the weekend and whose paralysis Mr. Kerry had cited in arguing for an expansion of those kind of stem cells. The only time the issue came up was when Mr. Kerry was asked about Catholic archbishops telling church members it would be a sin to vote for a candidate who supported abortion rights and unlimited stem-cell research. Mr. Kerry used the question to address a subject he has tended to avoid in the campaign: his faith.

''I am a Catholic and I grew up learning how to respect those views, but I disagree with them, as do many,'' Mr. Kerry said. ''I believe that I can't legislate or transfer to another American citizen my article of faith. What is an article of faith for me is not something that I can legislate on somebody who doesn't share that article of faith.''

Later, Mr. Bush, answering a question about religion in his own life, said: ''Prayer and religion sustain me. I receive calmness in the storms of the presidency. I love the fact that people pray for me and my family all around the country. Somebody asked me one time, 'Well, how do you know?' I said, 'I just feel it.'''

Repeatedly, the two men returned to the issue of health care, which ranks near the top of voters' concerns. Mr. Kerry said Mr. Bush let the American health care system deteriorate on his watch, with the cost of coverage soaring and the number of uninsured climbing to 45 million. He promoted his plan as a realistic effort to build on the existing system, and dismissed the idea advanced by the Republicans that it was an attempt at a government takeover.

''It's not a government plan,'' Mr. Kerry said. ''The government doesn't require you to do anything.'' In fact, Mr. Kerry's plan would try to expand coverage and hold down costs through an array of subsidies and tax credits for employers and workers. He would also expand public programs -- Medicaid and the State Childrens Health Insurance Program -- to cover more low-income children and adults.

But Mr. Bush persisted in his accusation that the Kerry plan would lead, inexorably, to government-run health care, a point disputed by health care experts. ''We have a fundamental difference of opinion,'' the president said. ''I think government-run health will lead to poor quality health, will lead to rationing, will lead to less choice.''

Mr. Bush and Mr. Kerry also fought over the Medicare law that Mr. Bush pushed through Congress last year, which aimed to provide prescription drug benefits to the elderly and get more private health plans involved in the government health insurance program for retirees. Mr. Kerry asserted that the legislation provided a ''$139 billion windfall profit to the drug companies, coming out of your pockets,'' because it barred the Medicare program from directly negotiating drug prices with the industry.

Mr. Bush countered that he had exercised leadership and got a law passed when others had failed. ''I was deeply concerned about seniors having to choose between prescription drugs and food,'' Mr. Bush said. ''And so I led, and in 2006 our seniors will get a prescription drug coverage in Medicare.''

In one particularly subdued exchange, Mr. Bush told Mr. Schieffer, in response to a question, that he did not know whether homosexuality was a matter of choice.

''I just don't know,'' he said. ''I do know what we have -- we have a choice to make in America, and that is to treat people with tolerance and respect and dignity,'' he said, adding: ''I also know in a free society people -- consenting adults -- can live the way they want to live, and that's to be honored.''

But Mr. Bush strongly reiterated his support for a constitutional amendment barring same-sex marriage. And he noted that Mr. Kerry had, in the Senate, voted against the Defense of Marriage Act, which reaffirmed the right of states not to recognize same-sex marriages licensed in other states.

Mr. Kerry responded by referring to Mary Cheney, the daughter of Vice President Dick Cheney.

''We're all God's children, Bob,'' he said. ''And I think if you were to talk to Dick Cheney's daughter, who is a lesbian, she would tell you that she's being who she was, she's being who she was born as. I think if you talk to anybody, it's not a choice.''

Both men came armed with what appeared to be well-practiced lines as they sought to deliver the kind of memorable remark -- like Ronald Reagan's ''there you go again'' -- that would assure them prominent spots in news accounts of the debate.

''You know, there's a mainstream in American politics and you sit right on the far left bank,'' Mr. Bush said. ''As a matter of fact, your record is such that Ted Kennedy, your colleague, is the conservative senator from Massachusetts.''

Mr. Kerry said: ''Being lectured by the president on fiscal responsibility is a little bit like Tony Soprano talking to me about law and order in this country.''

This final debate had its odd, if slightly humorous, moments as well. At one point, Mr. Kerry invoked the reports of two networks that he said had described Mr. Bush's characterization of Mr. Kerry's health care plan as false.

''In all due respect, I'm not so sure it's credible to quote leading news organizations about -- oh, never mind,'' Mr. Bush said, his voice trailing off in a nervous laugh.

''Let me quote the Lewin report,'' he said, and proceeded to do just that, as he referred to one analysis that put the cost of Mr. Kerry's health care plan at $1.2 trillion.

In one of the softer moments of the evening, Mr. Schieffer noted that all three of the men on stage were married to strong women. He then asked the candidates what they had learned from their spouses. Mr. Bush prompted laughter when he responded: ''To listen to them. To stand up straight and not scowl.''

Mr. Kerry responded with a reference to his wealthy wife, Teresa.

''Well, I guess the president and you and I are three examples of lucky people who married up,'' Mr. Kerry said.

''And some would say maybe me more so than others -- but I can take it,'' Mr. Kerry said, also drawing laughs.
