President Carter and Ronald Reagan each sought in a 90-minute debate tonight to reinforce the dominant themes of eight weeks of often desultory campaigning.

Mr. Carter hammered on arms control and the risk of war, while his challenger repeatedly denounced the President's economic record. With one week left in a tight race for the White House, Mr. Carter repeatedly appealed to the traditional elements of the Democratic constituency - blacks, Southerners, union members and admirers of the late Hubert H. Humphrey, the defeated Democratic candidate of 1968.

Mr. Reagan sought, with equal determination, to emphasize an image of reasonableness, and to deflect Mr. Carter's continual charges that the Californian's past statements contradicted his present policy. ''There you go again,'' he said once before insisting Mr. Carter had misrepresented his position.

Contrast in Styles

Mr. Carter's focus on detail contrasted with Mr. Reagan's more relaxed, more genial manner in the only campaign confrontation between the two this fall. But there were sharp differences offered.

John B. Anderson, the independent candidate who was not invited to the Cleveland confrontation because Mr. Carter refused to debate him and because he was slipping in the polls, attended electronically. On a cable network news show, he responded to the questions posed to his rivals, saying at one point, ''I have become convinced there really is no significant difference between them on whether we can fight a limited nuclear war. There is no such thing as limited nuclear war.'' Earlier in the day, in Washington, Mr. Anderson charged that Mr. Carter had played the role of ''fearmonger'' in the campaign, trying to frighten Mr. Anderson's supporters into thinking that if they voted for him, they would get someone else, promoting the idea that ''there's something wrong in voting for a candidate in whom you believe.'' (Page A29.)

For each candidate, this debate seemed the culmination of a long, long road toward the White House. The confrontation had the potential to settle a quest that began for Mr. Reagan at least as early as 1968, and for Mr. Carter no later than 1974.

Emotional Arguments Used

Beyond the details cited by Mr. Reagan and Mr. Carter, each used emotional argument often. Mr. Reagan asked rhetorical questions such as ''Is America as respected throughout the world as it was four years ago?'' and promised, as he does repeatedly on the stump, to ''take government off the backs of the great people of our country.''

Mr. Carter, whose continuing focus was on war and peace, as his campaign has stressed, emphasized how a President must make ''lonely decisions'' and how he was sure that from what he had learned in four years ''I think I'm a much wiser man.''

In his discussion of the hostage crisis, Mr. Carter stated flatly that once the 52 Americans were released, the United States would deliver to Iran the nearly $400 million in military equipment already paid for by Teheran and which has been stored in this country.

But he said that in order to maintain American neutrality in the Iran-Iraq conflict, the United States would not sell ''additional materiel or goods to Iran that might be of a warlike nature.''

This was the first time the Administration had been so categoric in its willingness to provide the spare parts and other military equipment. Iraq has already warned the United States that it would regard such delivery of previously ordered equipment to Iran as a violation of American neutrality.

On the economy, Mr. Carter said his Adminstration had created nine million new jobs and said that the inflation rate was now 7 percent. Mr. Reagan argued that inflation was at 12 percent, ''because the government is living too well.'' This was an area where Mr. Carter stressed his appeal to Democrats, and blacks, arguing they had been the beneficiaries of job programs in his term. Mr. Reagan snapped back that unemployment among blacks in Detroit was now 56 percent.

Mr. Reagan's running mate, George Bush, said of Mr. Reagan, ''He was Presidential. He stood there and he took this continued pummeling and was just great.''

Use of Military Power

The first question dealt with the use of military power. Each candidate was asked how his positions differed from those of his opponent.

Mr. Reagan, who answered first as the result of a coin toss, began by saying that he did not know exactly what Mr. Carter's policies were because the President had never specified them. The Republican then asserted that military force should be used only as a ''last resort'' and then only when the security of the United States was at stake. But he said that the ''burden'' of maintaining peace was the responsibility of this country.

As a follow-up, Mr. Reagan was asked how he reconciled his positions that military spending should increase, taxes decrease and the budget be balanced. Without providing details, Mr. Reagan declared that his economic plan would achieve those goals.

President Carter did not respond directly to the question of how his military policy differed from his opponent's. He used his time to state that he had dealt with ''thousands'' of critical military issues in his time in office and had learned from his experiences. There are ''no simple answers to complicated questions,'' the President said.

In response to a follow-up question, Mr. Carter reasserted his position that any threat to the security of the Persian Gulf area was a direct threat to the security of the United States and would be met accordingly.

Carter Challenged on Military

In rebuttal, Mr. Reagan challenged a statement by the President that military spending had been cut deeply in the eight years of the Nixon and Ford Administrations. The reason for those budget reductions, Mr. Reagan said, was that the war in Indochina was brought to an end.

Mr. Carter then said that the ''most important single issue in this campaign'' was control of nuclear weapons, and he accused Mr. Reagan of advocating the insertion of United States forces in trouble spots all over the world.

The next question focused on the American economy and the ideas that both Mr. Carter and Mr. Reagan had for dealing with inflation and unemployment.

Mr. Carter, speaking first on this subject, said that his Administratiowas bringing down the inflation rate, and he cited the reduction in oil imports this year of about a third and the rise of about nine million jobs since he took office as indications of the success that he was bringing to the job. He added that Mr. Reagan's economic programs, particularly his call for a large tax cut, were ''completely irresponsible'' and would ''destroy our country.''

In reply, Mr. Reagan charged that the high inflation and unemployment rates had been caused by Mr. Carter's policies and nothing else. He linked a solution to less government spending and said that this was possible even with his stated goals of increased defense spending and of tax cuts. ''I am confident it can be done,'' Mr. Reagan said, because he assserted that it had been done when he was Governor of California.

Reagan Plan Held Inflationary

Mr. Carter, in rebuttal, said that Mr. Reagan's economic plan was highly inflationary and that it was based on ending the minimum wage. Mr. Reagan said that Mr. Carter had distorted his record as Governor when the President stated that Mr. Reagan had had the three largest tax increases in California history while he was Governor.

Mr. Reagan said that the increases in spending in California were less, on a per capita basis, than when Mr. Carter was Governor of Georgia.

The candidates were asked what they would do to reverse the decline of American cities reflected in rising crime, strained race relations and persistent poverty. Mr. Reagan replied that he had advocated the establishment of industrial development zones in which tax incentives would be used to help create business and provide jobs, and he attacked Mr. Carter's record in such places as New York's South Bronx, where contended that ''nothing has been done.''

Asked about race relations, Mr. Reagan responded, ''I am eternally optimistic. I happen to believe we've made great progress from the days when I was young and this country didn't even know it had a racial problem.''

Mr. Carter retorted, ''Those who suffered from discrimination because of race or sex certainly knew we had a racial problem.'' He said his own urban renewal program had been a ''very successful effort,'' and that he had appointed ''more than twice as many black Federal judges as all previous Presidents in history,'' adding, ''I've done the same thing with women and Spanish-speaking Americans.''

Minimum Wage Issue Raised

Mr. Reagan then asserted that the minimum wage had helped create unemployment among black teen-agers. ''I have been in favor of a separate minimum wage for them,'' he said.

Citing Mr. Reagan's opposition to unemployment and welfare programs as well as the minimum wage, Mr. Carter charged that his Republican rival had shown ''great insensitivity to giving deprived families a better chance in life,'' adding that that was ''an important difference between him and me.''

Next, the candidates were asked whether, in light of the Iranian hostage situation, they had a policy for dealing with terrorism and what they had learned from the experience in Iran.

President Carter focused on the use of nuclear weapons as the ultimate threat of terrorists, and both men said they opposed the proliferation of such weapons.

Neither offered detailed policies toward dealing with terrorism or said what they had learned from the hostage situtation. ''In this situation,'' Mr. Reagan said, ''no one wants to say anything that could inadvertently delay the coming home of the hostages or cause them harm.''

But he proposed that, once the hostages were safely home, a Congressional investigation be conducted to disclose what diplomatic efforts had been made to secure their return, why they had been held so long and what had to be done to gain their release.

Clash on Arms Treaty

The two men clashed strikingly over the future of the Soviet-American treaty limiting strategic arms that was signed by Mr. Carter and Leonid I. Brezhnev, the Soviet leader, in June 1979.

After holding up Senate action on the treaty because of Soviet intervention in Afghanistan, the President has said he would seek early ratification if re-elected, while Mr.Reagan has proposed new negotiations to replace the pact with a new treaty.

Mr. Carter said that Mr. Reagan's approach was ''very dangerous,'' and he asserted that Mr. Reagan had never supported any arms control agreement with the Russians. The President said that domestic issues such as inflation and unemployment ''paled into insignificance'' compared with control of nuclear weapons.

He said that Mr. Reagan would ''discard'' a treaty that had been negotiated not only by the Carter Administration but also by his two Republican predecessors, Richard M. Nixon and Gerald R. Ford.

In response, Mr. Reagan insisted that ''I am not talking of scrapping, but of taking the treaty back into negotiations and negotiating as long as it takes'' for deeper reductions in arms. He also said that Mr. Ford, who had negotiated 90 percent of the treaty, now opposed ratification of the pact as it now stands. Mr. Reagan also said that the treaty had been blocked not by him but by the Democratic majority in the Senate.

The candidates were then asked about their policies on energy, an issue on which their positions sharply differ.

Carter Defends Energy Policies

Mr. Carter, answering first, asserted that in his Administration the country's reliance on imported oil had been reduced by one third and that approval of the ''windfall'' profits tax, which Mr. Reagan opposes, presaged ''a very bright vista for our nation in the future.''

Moreover, Mr. Carter said, while oil prices are sure to rise in the years ahead, the nation was well positioned to ''replace OPEC oil with American coal.''

Mr. Reagan said that he was not sure there would be steadily higher fuel costs. The nation has too long been portrayed as ''energypoor,'' when, in fact, it is ''energy-rich,'' he said, and it is only because of excessive Government interference that the nation is not tapping all its natural resources.

Mr. Carter responded that the regulations Mr. Reagan opposed had contributed to the health and safety of coal miners and clean air and water for all Americans. He asserted that his Republican opponent overemphasized nuclear power and would ''put all our eggs in one basket and give that basket to the major oil companies.''

Mr. Reagan responded that the President had misstated his position. The Californian said that he believed in clean air and clean water laws and had sponsored them when he was Governor, but he added that he believed private industry was better able than the Government to improve energy production. ''I think there are literally thousands of unnecessary regulations,'' Mr. Reagan said.

The candidates were asked what they would do about the burdens imposed by the Social Security System on wage-earners, particularly the young.

Mr. Reagan replied that the Social Security System was ''actuarily out of balance'' and that payroll tax increases ''will only postpone the day of reckoning.'' What is needed, he said, is a study by experts on possible reforms that would assure that those currently dependent on Social Security would ''continue to get those checks.''

Mr. Carter accused his opponent of having changed his position on Social Security and of having advocated making the system voluntary on four separate occasions, a proposal ''which would very quickly bankrupt'' the system, he said. Mr. Carter said that the Democratic Congress had now put the present system ''back on a sound financial basis.''

Mr. Reagan protested, ''That just isn't true,'' and contended that such actions had only ''delayed the actuarial imbalance for a few years.''

In response to the question of why his opponent should not be elected President, why his opponent's tenure would be harmful to the nation and what his opponent's greatest weakness was, President Carter again tried to picture Mr. Reagan as a man inclined more toward the use of force than diplomacy in solving crises.

He said the most important difference between himself and Mr. Reagan was their approach to the control of nuclear weapons. Mr. Reagan said he believed that a ''fundamental weakness'' in the President was that he sought to expand the role of government and thus infringe on individual rights.
