President Reagan and Walter F. Mondale battled through a debate tonight that was marked by pointed exchanges on foreign policy and Mr. Reagan's competence.

Mr. Mondale hammered at the theme that Mr. Reagan had failed the test of Presidential leadership by not curbing the Central Intelligence Agency's activities in Central America, not protecting American installations in Lebanon and not mastering the subject matter of nuclear arms control.

While the President spent much of the debate defending his policies and clarifying earlier statements, he also linked Mr. Mondale to economic and military policies he said were rejected four years ago and said his rival had opposed advances in military preparedness throughout his career.

'Who's in Charge?'

At one point, in a remark that seemed to make Mr. Reagan angry, Mr. Mondale said: ''Who's in charge? Who's handling these matters? That's my main point.''

Later Mr. Reagan responded, ''I know it'll come as a surprise to Mr. Mondale, but I am in charge.''

In pushing his criticism of Mr. Reagan as a failed leader, Mr. Mondale said the President had ignored warnings from the Joint Chiefs of Staff before the deaths of 241 Americans in the bombing of the Marine barracks a year ago at the Beirut airport.

He said the nation had been ''humiliated'' by Mr. Reagan's policies in Lebanon and ''embarrassed'' by the publication of a C.I.A. pamphlet ''giving instructions for hired assassins'' in Central America.

Reagan Rebuts MondaleMr. Mondale raised the question of Presidential knowledge most pointedly in discussing Mr. Reagan's proposal for space-based antimissile systems, drawing a rejoinder to his accusation that the President had extended the arms race into a realm he did not understand.

''I'm not a scientist,'' Mr. Reagan said. ''I said, and the Joint Chief of Staffs agreed with me, that it was time for us to turn our research ability to seeing if we could not find this kind of a defensive weapon.'' He added, ''I don't know what it would be, but if we can come up with one I think the world would be better off.''

Mr. Mondale retorted: ''Well, that's what a President's supposed to know, where those weapons are going to be. If they are space weapons, I assume they'll be in space. If they're antisatellite weapons, I assume they are going to be armed against any satellite. Now this is the most dangerous technology that we possess.''

Classic Reagan Display

The President, in a classic display of his trademark political style, seized a question about his age, 73 years, to respond with double-edged humor to a question about his age. ''I will not make age an issue in this campaign,'' said Mr. Reagan, who is the oldest President. ''I am not going to exploit for political purposes my opponent's youth and inexperience.'' Mr. Mondale, who is 56, joined in the laughter.

At another point, Mr. Reagan referred to a campaign commercial in which Mr. Mondale stood on the deck of the aircraft carrier Nimitz. Mr. Reagan said: ''That's an image of strength. Except that if he had had his way when the Nimitz was being planned, he would have been deep in the water out there, because there wouldn't have been any Nimitz to stand on. He was against it.''

Such exchanges turned on the central point of Mr. Reagan's knowledge and competence, as the President sought to correct the political damage caused by his uncharacteristically halting performance in the first debate Oct. 7. Differing Emphasis

Mr. Mondale's advisers have seen this last debate of the campaign, held at the Kansas City Municipal Auditorium, as a major event likely to be decisive in shaping the opinion of voters. Mr. Reagan's team has seen it as a more secondary event, in which the performance of the candidates will prove far less important to voters than their records over the past two decades.

Throughout the 90-minute program, Mr. Mondale stressed the idea that Mr. Reagan did not understand how to stop ''this ever-rising arms race madness.'' Mr. Reagan, performing more sharply and seeming more composed than in the first debate, tried to discredit the former Vice President as an advocate of unilateral disarmament.

Summarizing his arguments at the end of the evening, Mr. Mondale asserted that strength required ''wisdom and smarts,'' a knowledge of ''the essential facts'' and ''a vision of where to go'' and repeated some of his familiar pledges to restore growth, improve the environment, educate American youth and bring about fairness. Economy and Peace Cited

Mr. Reagan reminded listeners in his summation that there had been an economic expansion and that the world had been at peace. He asked if Americans wanted to return to the ''policies of weakness'' of his predecessors.

Mr. Reagan recalled in vivid terms writing a letter for a time capsule and pondering the ''terrible destructive weapons.''

''What they say 100 years from now depends on how we keep our rendezvous with destiny,'' Mr. Reagan said, adding that he hoped that one day people would say ''thank God for those people back in the 1980's.''

In accusing Mr. Reagan of lacking the knowledge for his job, Mr. Mondale repeatedly said the President believed that ballistic missiles carrying nuclear warheads could be called back after launching.

''I never conceived of such a thing,'' Mr. Reagan retorted. ''I never said any such thing.''

Mr. Reagan said he was simply observing of airplanes and submarines carrying such weapons that ''you could call them back before they launched their missiles.'' Mondale Defends Himself

Mr. Mondale refused to give ground on this point, asserting that the most authoritative journalists on disarmament had documented Mr. Reagan's lapses.

The former Vice President drew applause when he rebutted Mr. Reagan's assertion that Mr. Mondale favored a weaker military throughout his public career.

''Mr. President, I accept your commitment to peace, but I want you to accept my commitment to a strong national defense,'' he said.

''Your definition of military strength is to throw money at the Defense Department,'' he said. ''When you pay $500 for a $5 hammer, you're not buying strength.'' Dispute on Nuclear Arms

Mr. Mondale leaped on a suggestion by Mr. Reagan that space-based antimissile systems could be shared with the Soviet Union under some future treaties.

''The idea that we would share this with the Soviet Union is, in my mind, a total nonstarter,'' Mr. Mondale said. He then condemned the entire program. ''Why don't we stop this madness now and draw a line to keep the heavens free of war?'' Mr. Mondale asked.

Mr. Reagan faulted Mr. Mondale's philosophy as being based on an old- fashioned nuclear strategy. ''Mr. Mondale seems to believe in MAD,'' Mr. Reagan said. ''MAD is mutual assured nuclear destruction.''

Mr. Reagan said he planned to use his second term to work for total abolition of nuclear weapons.

Mr. Reagan appeared more fit and rested than he did in Louisville, Ky., site of the first debate. He seemed momentarily nonplussed when Edwin Newman, the moderator, called time on his closing statement. But moments later, with his wife, Nancy, at his side, Mr. Reagan clasped his hands together and raised them in a boxer's victory gesture, as if aware that he had apparently avoided any verbal stumble in making his points.

Mr. Reagan veered closest to a gaffe in his summation, when he seemed to be criticizing his own leadership. ''Do you want to see America return to the policies of weakness of the last four years?'' he asked.

Mr. Mondale also misspoke. He suggested that Mr. Reagan ''doesn't know that submarine missiles are recallable.'' In fact, such missiles cannot be called back once launched.

Immediately after the debate, Reagan and Mondale aides rushed to the press room here to put forward conflicting political claims.

James A. Johnson, the Mondale campaign chairman, and McGeorge Bundy, former national security adviser to President Kennedy, argued that Mr. Reagan's statements on arms control had created new areas of political vulnerabilty.

''The whole point about the debate is one man was in command of the facts and figures and one was not,'' said Mr. Bundy.

Lee Atwater, deputy campaign chairman for Mr. Reagan, emphasized the lack of a dramatic gain for the Democratic candidate. ''He needed to get in here tonight and score the kind of knockout to get 10 or 15 points in the polls,'' Mr. Atwater said. ''On the other hand, the President tonight put the age issue behind him. He was in command of the facts and figures.''

For this debate, Mr. Reagan and Mr. Mondale switched sides of the stage, the President taking the left. They strode out, shook hands and, almost immediately, Mr. Mondale began his criticism of the Reagan Administration.

Asked if there was not some need for use of force in that area, Mr. Mondale acknowledged the need for some military assistance but said that, over all, Mr. Reagan did not appear to be in charge. 2 Views of Manual

Mr. Reagan was asked about the C.I.A.'s manual that told Nicaraguan rebels how to carry out political assassinations and kidnappings.

''It's been on many people's minds,'' he replied. He said that ''a gentleman down in Nicaragua'' who was paid to advise the agency had written it. Agency officials in Nicaragua and in Washington excised some of it, he said, ''but some of the original copies got out down there.''

Mr. Mondale's version was different. ''Several thousand'' of these manuals were distributed, he said. And the President ''says he didn't know.'' Mr. Mondale shook his head. ''I don't know which is worse. Not knowing or knowing and not stopping.'' Comments on 'Evil Empire'

Mr. Reagan was asked about his attitude toward the Soviet Union, which he once called an ''evil empire,'' and whether he would seek in a second term to re-establish detente or to ''roll back'' the ''empire.''

The President said he had nothing to retract about what he had said of the Soviet Union, and added that ''many of the things they have done are evil.'' But he noted that the United States and the Soviet Union were the two great powers of the world and that they had to ''live with each other.''

''We're not going to change their system and they are not going to change ours,'' he said. He said the two nations had a common interest in avoiding conflict, removing nuclear threats and establishing mutual understanding.

He said, however, that the United States must also be ''realistic,'' contending that the Soviet Union had been engaged in the biggest military buildup in history and that the United States was building its own forces to provide a deterrent.

Mr. Mondale was then asked about summit meetings with the Soviet Union and whether agreements could be trusted.

He replied that arms agreements growing out of summit meetings would be valuable but that they alone would not be sufficient. He said verification procedures would be necessary and that he had ''no illusions'' about the Soviet leaders, whom he called ''tough'' and ''ruthless'' adversaries.

Mr. Mondale said he differed with Mr. Reagan by contending that American and Soviet leaders needed to ''meet on the common ground of survival.'' Instead of more arms control, the two powers have engaged in a more extensive arms race, he said.

Mr. Mondale said the United States must be ''realistic'' about the Soviet leadership but must also find ways to reduce the arms race. He pledged that there would be ''no unilateral disarmament'' in a Mondale Administration. Eastern Europe Discussed

Mr. Mondale was asked what he would do to help Eastern European nations.

He said it would be his strategy to ''not accept Soviet control'' over the nations of Eastern Europe. He suggested that those nations could be helped to ''pull away'' from the Soviet sphere.

Asked about the circumstances under which the United States should employ troops abroad, Mr. Mondale again attacked Mr. Reagan over his policies in Central America. He said any association with ''political assassinations'' strengthened the enemies of the United States.

''We need to be strong,'' Mr. Mondale said. ''But we are a democracy.''

Mr. Reagan, questioned about United States military involvment in Lebanon, gave a chronological account of the United States involvement there. He said the Marine mission in Lebanon had succeeded before the terrorist bombing of their headquarters. ''I have no apologies for going in on a peace mission,'' Mr. Reagan said. Iranian Hostage Issue Raised

The President was asked if the lack of retaliation by the United States was similar to President Carter's treatment of Iran when Americans were taken hostage there. Mr. Reagan said the two situations were different, because in Lebanon no identifiable government was responsible.

''Yes, we want to retaliate,'' Mr. Reagan said. ''But only if we can put the finger on the people responsible.''

Mr. Mondale retorted, ''Groucho Marx said: who do you believe, me or your own eyes?'' The former Vice President said terrorists had repeatedly won victories at the expense of the United States under the Reagan Administration.

To Mr. Mondale's assertion that the Reagan Administration had avoided any arms control initiative for three and a half years and moved only recently to meet with the Soviet Union, the President insisted that it was the Russians who had walked away from meaningful discussions of disarmament.

The two candidates also differed on a proposal to limit medium-range missiles that was eventually scrapped. Mr. Mondale asserted that the President had repudiated the plan, which was originally proposed by his chief arms negotiator. Mr. Reagan said the Soviet Union was responsible for the failure to agree. Leadership Is Discussed

After Mr. Mondale repeatedly questioned Mr. Reagan's leadership, the former Vice President was asked about his own leadership in not repudiating the Rev. Jesse Jackson's diplomatic mission in Central America, particularly in Cuba, in which the civil rights leader had warm words for Fidel Castro.

Mr. Mondale said he had no admiration for Mr. Castro. But, Mr. Mondale added, Mr. Jackson was an independent person and ''I don't control him.''

Mr. Reagan was asked about his oft-quoted belief in Biblical prophecies of Armageddon and whether he felt that the world was heading for a nuclear Armageddon. He also was asked whether he believed the United States and the world could survive it.

The President noted that he had discussed Armageddon and that there had been ''philosophic discussion'' of it among theologians and others. No one knows whether Armageddon is ''a thousand years away or the day after tomorrow,'' he said, but added that he had never ''seriously warned'' of Armageddon. He reiterated a statement that he said he had made a number of times: ''A nuclear war cannot be won and must never be fought.''
