OXFORD, Miss. – John McCain last night in the first presidential debate slammed Barack Obama as a far-left, tax-hiking, pork-barrel spending liberal inexperienced on foreign policy.

Obama smacked McCain back as a President Bush clone out of touch on the economy and favors the wealthy with his tax plan.

The two White House contenders also traded blows over energy issues, Iraq, Afghanistan and Iran.

The initial plan was to have the 90-minute debate focus exclusively on foreign policy and national security.

But given the crisis on Wall Street, moderator Jim Lehrer of PBS asked about economic issues right away – and the sparring on pocketbook issues took the first 40 minutes.

Obama, who took the first question at the University of Mississippi event billed by locals as the “Duel in the Delta,” struck first.

“John, 10 days ago, you said the fundamentals of the economy are sound. And I just fundamentally disagree,” Obama said.

McCain blasted back by hammering Obama’s spending record during his first term in the Senate.

“[Obama] has asked for $932 million of earmark pork-barrel spending, nearly a million dollars for every day that he’s been in the United States Senate,” McCain said.

“That kind of thing is not the way to rein in runaway spending in Washington, DC.”

By comparison, McCain said he has never requested an earmark during his 26 years in the Senate.

The Republican nominee also accused Obama of having the “most liberal voting record in the Senate” and being too far to the left to achieve consensus in Washington.

Obama countered that McCain wants to cut taxes for the wealthy at the expense of the middle class. The Democratic nominee said his tax cuts goes for citizens making less than $250,000.

The Illinois Democrat said his plan was a better recipe “than the policies of President Bush that John McCain wants to follow.”

McCain shot back: “Sen. Obama didn’t mention that, along with tax cuts, he is also proposing $800 billion in new spending on new programs.”

Obama insisted he has a way to pay for the increased spending on health care and education. He also blamed President Bush – who, Obama said, was supported by McCain 90 percent of the time on Senate votes – for leading an “orgy of spending.”

Tiring of the Bush comparison, McCain said, “I have opposed the president on spending, climate change, torture, Guantanamo Bay . . . I’m the maverick.”

A flash CNN poll of debate watchers found that Obama won. Of the 524 people queried, 51 percent said Obama won and 38 percent said McCain did. Undecided voters also gave Obama the nod in a CBS survey – 40 percent said Obama won, 22 percent said McCain and 38 percent said it was a draw.

Both were vague on questions concerning the Wall Street rescue plan, a burning issue. Obama declined comment on whether he supported the package, noting there is no final language for him to read.

McCain said “sure” when asked if he’d support a deal if one is reached.

Both also dodged a query about what they would give up in their economic plans to pay for the financial rescue. Neither said they would give up their most cherished proposals.

The two also quarreled on energy. McCain said Obama objects to offshore drilling and nuclear power, while Obama insisted he’s more committed to green initiatives than McCain.

And they battled fiercely on Iraq.

“I opposed [the Iraq war] from the beginning,” Obama said. “We hadn’t caught bin Laden. We hadn’t put al Qaeda to rest . . . Al Qaeda is stronger now than at any time since 2001. We took our eye off the ball in Afghanistan.”

McCain said, “Sen. Obama said the surge wouldn’t work . . . That it was doomed to failure.”

“The surge is succeeding. Sen. Obama won’t acknowledge we are winning in Iraq,” said McCain, a former navy pilot and Vietnam POW.

But Obama stood his ground – saying the Iraq war has actually strengthened Iran’s role in the region.

McCain also charged that Obama wants to meet with the leaders of Iran, Cuba and Venezuela without preconditions.

“This isn’t just naive. It’s dangerous,” he said.

Obama parried that even Henry Kissinger, a McCain adviser, said it’s prudent to meet with enemies.

However, Kissinger issued a statement after the debate saying that Obama had mischaracterized his position and that he had not recommended the president meet with Iranian leaders.

During the discussion on foreign policy, McCain often referred to Obama as “naive” or misinformed – in short, an inexperienced lightweight. Obama, by contrast, said six times that McCain was “right” or he agreed with his rival.

McCain said: “I honestly don’t believe that Sen. Obama has the knowledge or experience and has the wrong judgments in a number of areas, including his initial reaction to the Russian invasion – aggression in Georgia.”
