WINSTON-SALEM, N.C. - Republican George Bush pummeled Democrat Michael Dukakis as an out-of-the-mainstream liberal, and Dukakis demanded that Bush stop questioning his patriotism during the presidential candidates' first debate Sunday night.

``Of course, the vice president's questioning my patriotism. I don't think there's any question about that, and I resent it. I resent it,'' Dukakis said in an emotional high point of the 90-minute nationally televised encounter.

Bush, the vice president, repeatedly referred to Dukakis, the governor of Massachusetts, as a liberal and a ``card-carrying member of the ACLU.'' But he insisted he was not implying that Dukakis is unpatriotic.

``I'm not questioning his patriotism. ... I'm questioning his judgment ... or where he's coming from,'' Bush said.

The two candidates used their first showdown, in a chapel auditorium at Wake Forest University, to confront issues that have dominated their campaigns, ranging from health and homelessness to Iran and ``Star Wars.''

But both men were also intent on forging a personal identity with the voters and sowing doubts about their opponents' suitability for the presidency.

``He (Dukakis) is out there, out of the mainstream. ... My argument with the governor is do we want this country to go that far left,'' Bush said.

Bush said he brings up Dukakis' ``card-carrying'' membership in the ACLU, the American Civil Liberties Union, because ``I don't agree with most of the positions of the ACLU.'' He claimed the organization favors removing tax exemptions from the Catholic Church, eliminating parental guidance ratings on movies, repealing child pornography laws and removing ``In God We Trust'' from U.S. currency.

Dukakis flared back with the patriotism argument.

``I'm in public service because I love this country ... And nobody's going to question my patriotism as the vice president has now repeatedly,'' he said.

He asked why Bush, as president of the Senate, has never suggested reciting the Pledge of Allegiance to open Senate sessions. Bush has used the pledge issue against Dukakis because the governor vetoed, on constitutional grounds, a bill to require teachers to lead their students in the recitation daily.

Dukakis' main lines of attack on Bush included a contention that his choice of Sen. Dan Quayle, R-Ind., as running mate was unwise; an accusation that Bush endorsed trading arms for hostages; and repeated denigration of the Reagan-Bush administration's domestic policies.

In defense of his own proposal to require health insurance for all workers, Dukakis twice told the audience about a man he said he met in Houston who had lost his health insurance. Dukakis said the man was afraid to let his 11-year-old son play Little League baseball for fear the child would be injured and the family would be unable to pay his medical bills.

He referred to Charles Strickland, an unemployed oil-tool company worker whom he met on a Sept. 20 visit to Hermann Hospital. Strickland said after the debate that he referred to school sports, not those sponsored by Little League, which officials say provide insurance for players who can't afford it.

Bush said he could not support mandatory medical insurance because such a requirement would force people out of work when employers had to reduce staff to pay the bills.

Dukakis shot back that the Bush campaign had called the health insurance proposal ``socialized medicine.''

The last time Bush used that term, Dukakis said, was in 1964 referring to Medicare, the health insurance program for the elderly. ``He was wrong then, and he's wrong now.''

A question about drugs set off an argument about Panamanian strongman Manuel Noriega. Dukakis said the Reagan-Bush administration set a bad example for young people by ``dealing with a drug-running Panamanian dictator.''

Bush shot back that seven presidential administrations ``were dealing with Mr. Noriega. It was the Reagan-Bush administration that brought this man to justice.'' Noriega was indicted in Florida earlier this year for drug dealing.

The debate, though mostly serious, was at times entertaining as both candidates pulled out well-rehearsed one-liners.

Dukakis, claiming Bush has supported tax increases at least three times while promising never to raise taxes, called the vice president ``the Joe Isuzu of American politics.''

Bush complained that one of Dukakis' answers was ``about as clear as Boston Harbor.''

The vice president adopted self-deprecating humor to recoup from a moment when he forgot the name of the MX missile.

``It's Christmas! It's Christmas!'' Bush laughed in reference to his recent gaffe declaring that Sept. 7, instead of Dec. 7, was Pearl Harbor Day, a calendar glitch that would have made the debate occur on Christmas.

``Wouldn't it be nice to be the iceman so you never make a mistake?'' Bush added in a reference to Dukakis' reputation as a cold technicrat.

The two locked horns on the Iran-Contra scandal, with Dukakis accusing Bush of endorsing the sale of arms to Iran to secure release of American hostages.

The decision was ``one of the most tragic, one of the most mistaken foreign policy deicisions we've ever made in this country and, I dare say, encouraged others to take hostages,'' Dukakis said.

Bush rejoined: ``I will make a deal with you. I will take all the blame (for the arms sales) if you give me half the credit for all good things that have happened in world peace since Ronald Reagan and I took over from the Carter administration.''

A second and final Bush-Dukakis debate is scheduled for Los Angeles on Oct. 13 or 14.

Standing on a red carpet behind light oak lecterns in front of a bright blue backdrop, the candidates performed in an auditorium that seated 2,400 persons.

But the audience they sought to sway was the estimated 100 million television viewers who were expected to tune in. A spokesman for the commission that sponsored the debates predicted an even larger viewing audience, 130 million to 140 million - well higher than the number of persons expected to vote in the presidential election Nov. 8.

The significance of the first debate was heightened by the nature of the presidential race, shown by most recent polls to be close, with Bush holding a slight edge.

Because more than a third of the voters in recent polls say they are undecided or wavering and need to know more about both men, the debate was considered crucial.

The stakes were especially high for Dukakis, who is the less known of the two candidates and who went into the contest perceived to be running a little behind. But they also were high for Bush who was trying to overcome a propensity for misstatements on the campaign trail.

Immediately after the debate, the two candidates headed for rallies in town - Bush's at the Dixie Fairgrounds and Dukakis' at the Benton Convention Center.

They planned to hit the campaign trail early today - Dukakis heading for Ohio and New Jersey, critical industrial states, and Bush for Tennessee and Georgia, part of a South that Republicans have come to rely on in national elections.

Both candidates raised expectations for the importance of the debate.

Dukakis, on arrival at the airport here, called the event ``a historic debate.'' He said the confrontation was ``long overdue.''

Bush said debate day was ``the second most important'' of his political life. ``Election Day's the most important.''
