John McCain charged tonight that Barack Obama would be the worst American president on the economy since Herbert Hoover in the Great Depression by pushing tax hikes during a financial crisis.

“Nailing down Senator Obama’s tax proposals is like nailing Jell-O to the wall. But he wants to raise your taxes,” McCain said during the spirited, town-hall-style debate at Belmont University.

“My friends, the last president to raise taxes during tough economic times was Herbert Hoover, and he practiced protectionism as well, which I’m sure we’ll get to at some point.”

With the continuing meltdown on Wall Street and trailing Obama in recent polls, McCain went straight at his rival as the two White House hopefuls took questions from the audience and via the Internet.

Obama stressed that his plan would cut taxes on everyone making under $250,000 a year, while hiking taxes on higher earners.

“Senator Obama’s secret is his taxes will increase taxes on 50 percent of small-business owners,” McCain said.

Then McCain, looking directly at Obama, said, “Senator Obama said he’d forego a tax increase if the economy is bad. I’ve got news for you, Senator Obama. The economy is bad.”

But Obama returned fire and defended his tax proposal as fair.

“[McCain] said he thought the fundamentals of the economy were sound,” Obama said.

“Senator McCain wants to give a $300 billion tax cut, $200 billion of it to the largest corporations and oil companies – and $100 billion of it going to people like CEOs on Wall Street,” Obama added.

McCain’s plan would slash business taxes from 35 percent to 25 percent, lock in the current Bush tax cuts for all payers, and phase in a doubling of tax breaks for parents per each dependent child.

The two also traded blows over the mortgage crisis and the Wall Street meltdown when an audience member asked about it.

Answering first, McCain said he raised the alarm two years ago about lax lending practices at mortgage-lending behemoths Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac.

But “Obama and his crony friends” resisted, McCain said. “Senator Obama was the second highest recipient of donations from Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac in history,” McCain added.

Obama countered that McCain has supported deregulation “in every circumstance.”

“It was Senator McCain’s campaign chairman who was a lobbyist for Fannie Mae – not me,” said Obama, who has called for stricter mortgage oversight.

The two candidates also clashed sharply in the final one-third of the debate over foreign policy, particularly the Iraq war. Obama was an early critic of the war, while McCain has been a staunch supporter and urged the “surge” strategy to increase US troops there.

“Senator Obama would have brought our troops home in defeat. I will bring them home in victory and in honor,” McCain said.

Obama said the focus on Iraq had distracted the United States from the threat in Afghanistan, and under attack from McCain defended his willingness to strike against terrorists in Pakistan without approval from Islamabad.

“We have fundamental differences about the use of military power,” McCain said.

Moderated by NBC’s Tom Brokaw, the questions for the foes’ second of three debates leading up to the Nov. 4 election were asked by members of the audience and Internet users. Brokaw screened the questions.

Candidates were barred from questioning each other, and were forbidden from walking outside a designated area near assigned chairs.

McCain has thrived in town-hall forums.

He held 100 of them in New Hampshire before the GOP primary in January, where he tackled questions with zest from all comers and revived his campaign.

He initially urged Obama to agree to participate in 10 town-hall events across the nation for the general election, but Obama refused.

But McCain has held fewer town-hall events in recent months, and those he held were restricted mostly to supporters rather than open to all comers. He has faced fewer tough questions and held more rallies.

Obama honed his debating skills going toe to toe with Hillary Rodham Clinton in some 20 debates during the Democratic primaries.

Polls showed he bested McCain two weeks ago in Mississippi during the first presidential debate.
