BOSTON – Character isn’t supposed to be a hot issue anymore, but it was at the first presidential debate – and the issue scored for George W. Bush as he brought it home to Al Gore instead of Bill Clinton.

That’s a prime reason why Bush seems to have defied expectations and held his own against master debater Gore at their showdown in Boston.

“They moved that sign, ‘The buck stops here,’ from the Oval Office to ‘The buck stops here’ in the Lincoln Bedroom,” said Bush, referring to Gore’s role in raising fat-cat funny money.

Sounding more sorrowful than angry, Bush said he’s “disappointed” that Gore ducked responsibility for the Buddhist temple fund-raiser, adding: “People in the highest office in the land must be responsible for the decisions they make in life.”

Bristling, Gore shot back: “You may want to focus on scandals, I want to focus on results” – but that wasn’t really an answer to Bush’s charge.

And the fact that Gore running mate Joe Lieberman was quick to grouse afterward that Bush made an unfair personal attack is a good clue that the Gore team fears that blow hit home.

Many analysts (especially Democrats) believe that in this time of peace and prosperity, Bush’s only hope to defeat Bill Clinton’s partner is to find a way to revive the integrity issue and aim it at Gore.

There was no knockout blow, and at the start of the debate, Gore – armed with facts and figures – seemed to dominate, but Bush found his feet and had some of the best zingers of the debate.

Pundit-land’s instant reaction was that this debate won’t have a big impact, but that could change over the next day or so as voters watch replay after replay of the highlights.

The ultimate impact could depend on a gut-check – some analysts thought Gore looked commanding, while others felt he was obnoxiously smug. It may take voters a few days to decide how they saw him.

Gore did a good job of drumming in – over and over and over again – the idea that Bush’s tax cuts will go to the wealthy. Bush was shakiest on foreign policy and edged close to a gaffe on Russia’s role in Serbia.

But Gore clearly ducked the first question when moderator Jim Lehrer asked if he was charging that Bush lacks the experience to become president.

“I have actually not questioned Gov. Bush’s experience,” claimed Gore – hardly the whole truth, since, in fact, he has – and Bush aides were hoping to turn that into a new credibility question for the veep.

Gore, whose over-rouged makeup did him no favor, also had a smirk problem- he grimaced, rolled his eyes, ostentatiously sighed and even overrode Lehrer at times, as if trying to pantomime a message that Bush isn’t up to the job.

In a debate aimed primarily at women – most undecided voters right now are women, and a lot of men were watching baseball – that kind of snide gesturing could backfire.

Certainly, it played to Bush’s strength as the more likable guy.

The two men painted very different views of government – Gore highlighted what Uncle Sam can do, while Bush underscored the idea that Americans should choose what to do with their own money.

Viewers could get lost in the soup of numbers tossed out on Social Security and prescription drugs, and the best bet is that each guy’s partisans bought his side. Which wasn’t too bad an outcome for Bush.

Bush also hit repeatedly at the idea that the Gore team has had its chance and failed to deliver on past promises, such as tax cuts – “Why haven’t they done it in seven years?” he asked.
