HARTFORD, Conn. - President Clinton and challenger Bob Dole differed sharply but civilly Sunday on the role of government and a host of specific programs during a 90-minute debate that kicked off the final month of the national campaign.

As expected, Dole pictured Clinton as a liberal Democrat who favored government intervention, while Clinton painted his opponent as a Republican naysayer willing to leave citizens exposed to illness, need and crime.

"I trust the people," Dole declared. "The president trusts the government."

Clinton said that while he, too, wanted to give people "more power in their own lives," he supported "legitimate efforts" by the government to protect its citizens, such as by enacting the Family Leave Act which Dole opposed.

Dole, trailing badly in polls, looked for an opening that might give traction to his campaign, but Clinton lived up to his reputation as a skillful debater by parrying the Republican's major thrusts.

When Dole charged that Clinton's was "a very liberal administration," Clinton said the charge is "what their party always drags out when they're in a tight race."

Clinton called "this liberal charge" the GOP's "golden oldie."

"I just don't think that dog will hunt this time," Clinton said.

Dole kept pressing the issue, recalling even Clinton's running the Texas campaign of liberal Democratic presidential candidate George McGovern in 1972.

For his part, Clinton repeatedly pressed what he said was the unworkability of Dole's proposal to cut personal income taxes by 15 percent, saying at one point: "Sen. Dole`s plans are not good for the country."

Even as Dole insisted he would not make a campaign issue of the Whitewater affair, involving Clinton's financial and political dealings in Arkansas, the former senator made a point of drawing the president out on whether he would pardon any of his former associates who have been convicted in the scandal.

"I will not give anyone special treatment," Clinton said, repeating a position he has voiced before, which stops short of guaranteeing he will not grant such pardons. "And I will adhere to the law."

Dole indicated Clinton's response held out the prospect of a pardon for his friends and that a president should reply, "No comment," when asked about such legal issues.

When it became Clinton's turn to reply on the question of personal issues in the campaign, he took Dole at his word, answering: "No comment."

Dole added moments of sometimes biting humor, but he also faulted Clinton on small matters. Dole said he would refer to his opponent as "Mr. President," a courtesy he said Clinton did not extend to George Bush in the 1992 debates.

Clinton's chief argument for re-election was that his first term was reason enough for his winning a second.

"Four years ago you took me on faith," Clinton said. "Now there is a record. . . . We are better off than we were four years ago. Let's keep it going."

Clinton said that he would lead the nation from a reduced deficit to a balanced budget and wanted to continue beyond a revamping of welfare to guaranteeing that the nation could "move a million people to work."

Dole contended, however, "there is a lot wrong with America," including an issue he returned to repeatedly: the growth of marijuana use by teen-agers.

Clinton recalled Dole's opposition to dozens of programs over the years, including those which polling shows are very popular, such as student loans, Head Start and the Department of Education.

The debates are considered the most important event of the campaign for undecided voters and Sunday's opener was beamed to an expected audience of 70 million to 90 million Americans from The Bushnell theater in the Connecticut capital. In the hall, an old tryout house for Broadway-bound productions, were less than a 1,000 handpicked campaign supporters of each candidate and financial backers of the non-governmental Commission on Presidential Debates.

To emphasize what Dole has characterized as Clinton's sleazy practices, the Republican brought Billy Dale, head of the White House travel office staff fired soon after the Democrats took over, to be in the audience. Dale was subsequently subjected to a Justice Department investigation that resulted in a fraud indictment, but a jury acquitted him.

Dale and Republican congressional investigators contend the prosecution was politically inspired to draw attention away from the plan to Clinton and his wife, first lady Hillary Rodham Clinton, to install a new travel office staff that would shift contracts to their friends, including Hollywood producer Harry Thomason.

Clinton campaign spokesman Joe Lockhart said before the debate that Dale's presence would be "a gimmick."

"I've been in desperate campaign, and I know what they're doing," Lockhart said.

A debate between Vice President Al Gore and Dole's running mate, former Housing Secretary Jack Kemp, is scheduled for Wednesday in St. Petersburg, Fla., and Clinton and Dole are to hold a final debate on Oct. 16 in San Diego.

The debate commission, in a decision federal courts refused over the last week to overrule, decided against participation by Ross Perot, the presidential nominee of the Reform Party who got 19 percent of the popular vote in 1992 as an independent candidate, because he had no realistic chance of winning.

The Dole campaign, which believes Perot has the potential to cost the Republican more votes than he can take from Clinton, sided strongly with the commission, and the Clinton campaign, after backing Perot a bit for public-relations purposes, acquiesced in his exclusion.

Perot, however, took to the airwaves immediately before and after the debate, in a 30-minute "infomercial" on ABC-TV, financed with part of the $29 million in tax check-off funds he is getting from the Federal Election Commission, and on CNN's "Larry King Live."

Nationally, two new surveys found Clinton leading Dole by 15 and 16 percentage points.

"President Clinton is in a real comfort zone," said John Zogby, the New York-based pollster who conducted one of the surveys for Reuters news service. "Dole doesn't seem to be moving at all."

Connecticut's Republican governor, John Rowland, accused Clinton of "just sitting on his lead, running out the clock." Greeting Dole at the Hartford airport, Rowland conceded the debate was "much more important" for the lagging Republican.

White House chief of staff Leon Panetta said he doubted Clinton's big lead would hold over the next four weeks.

"I don't think there's any question it's going to tighten up," Panetta said on ABC's "This Week with David Brinkley."
