LOS ANGELES - Zeroing in on each other's perceived weaknesses, Republican George Bush attacked Democrat Michael Dukakis for ``liberal'' positions on the death penalty and defense cuts while Dukakis questioned Bush's selection of a controversial running mate as the candidates tangled in their final presidential debate Thursday.

Dukakis challenged Bush's judgment on his selection of Indiana Sen. Dan Quayle as a running mate, while Bush lashed out at Dukakis as a liberal who would ``unleash an army of IRS agents into everybody's kitchen.''

Bush made it clear that the 90-minute, nationally televised face-off will be not be repeated this political year.

``I will not agree to another debate. The American people are up to here with them,'' Bush said, holding his hand to his throat.

Dukakis, without saying whether he wanted to debate again, retorted: ``I can understand after the vice presidential debate why the vice president would want no further debate.''

He was referring the Oct. 5 encounter between Quayle and Texas Sen. Lloyd Bentsen, an exchange in which Bentsen was the perceived winner.

Bush used a question about the possibility of Quayle's ascending to the presidency to stand up strongly for his running mate and to criticize Quayle's detractors.

``I'd have confidence in him. I made a good selection,'' Bush said, contending Quayle had suffered ``unfair pounding and hooting'' from political opponents.

Two emotional segments of the debate were prompted by questions about the death penalty and abortion.

Asked whether he would favor the death penalty if his wife, Kitty, were raped and murdered, Dukakis said he would not because he does not think capital punishment is a deterrent to crime.

Bush said some crimes are ``so heinous, so brutal, so outrageous'' that executions are merited.

Answering a question about abortion, Bush appeared to choke up for a moment as he discussed the death of his young daughter in the 1950s, and Dukakis described his and his wife's loss of a newborn baby.

The heart of Bush's attack on Dukakis as a liberal was questioned by one of the members of the debate panel who quoted Republican U.S. Sen. Mark Hatfield of Oregon as saying Bush's father would be disturbed by his campaign.

``I think my dad would be pretty proud,'' Bush said, noting he has turned his campaign around since the summer by portraying Dukakis as a liberal.

Bush said he underwent personal insults during the Democratic National Convention, and he accused Dukakis of describing President Reagan's administration as rotting from the head down.

``What I don't like is this left-wing political agenda, and I have to help define that,'' Bush said.

Dukakis retorted with a parry on an issue Bush has been using effectively against him, gun control.

``In 1980, President Reagan called you a liberal for voting for federal gun control,'' Dukakis said. ``I don't think labels mean a thing.''

Bush, as a U.S. congressman from Texas, voted for the 1968 gun control act.

Dukakis said he wanted to set labels aside for the remainder of the election: ``Let's get to the heart of the matter, which is the future of the country.''

Deriding Bush for harping on the ``liberal'' theme, Dukakis said, ``If I had a dollar for every time you've used that term, I'd qualify for one of those tax breaks for the rich you advocate.''

The candidates debate took place at Pauley Pavilion on the UCLA campus here, just 25 days before voters go to the polls Nov. 8.

On the question of tax increases to cut the federal budget deficit, Bush said he can fulfill his pledge of no new taxes because an economic growth in the nation would bring additional revenues to the federal government.

``I want to keep this expansion. I don't want to kill it with a tax increase,'' Bush said, blaming Congress for the nation's deficits.

Dukakis accused Bush of having broken his no-taxes promise three times this year: ``It isn't worth the paper it's written on.''

He said the nation need a chief executive who will work with Congress, not blame it for the deficit. Dukakis said he could promise to lower the deficit, not eliminate it in the next four years.

Bush returned fire by asking Dukakis to join him in supporting a balanced budget amendment and a line-item veto for the president.

He accused Dukakis of raiding the Massachusetts pension fund to balance the state's budget and criticized the Dukakis' proposal to increase federal tax collections.

``Mr. Bush says we're going to put the IRS on every taxpayer. I'm not for that,'' Dukakis said.

He also reacted angrily to Bush's insinuation that he had taken money from the Massachusetts pension fund.

``I didn't raid the pension fund in Massachusetts. You're just wrong about that,'' Dukakis said.

The final debate had special importance for Dukakis, who has been counting on the engagement to boost his standing.

The latest polls indicate Bush holds a lead of between 2 and 6 percentage points in the popular vote.

But an ABC-Washington Post poll released Wednesday indicated Bush is ahead in enough states to provide him 220 electoral votes of the 270 required to win.

The debate was sponsored by the bipartisan Commission on Presidential Debates, which also sponsored the only other presidential debate last month and the vice presidential candidate debate earlier this month.

The League of Women Voters had originally been scheduled to sponsor the final debate but dropped the project claiming undue influence by the presidential campaigns.
