SAN DIEGO - Bob Dole goaded President Clinton on ethics in their final debate Wednesday night but failed to spark a significant response.

Starting with the opening question, from a schoolteacher, Dole, the Republican nominee, contended many Americans "have lost their faith in government" and criticized the character and trust of the Democratic administration.

"They see ethical problems in the White House today," Dole said, but despite his call for Clinton to "face up" to the problem, the president avoided answering him.

Near the end of the 90-minute faceoff, Dole said that with 30 members of the administration forced out, or even jailed, "then you've got an ethical problem."

Again, Clinton refused to be drawn in.

Under Clinton, Dole said early in the encounter, there have been "scandals on almost a daily basis," pointing specifically to the White House requisition of FBI files of officials from former Republican administrations.

The result of such controversies, Dole said, was "a great deal of cynicism."

When Clinton did not respond directly, Dole in his rebuttal turned to "public trust."

"That trust is being violated" by the Clinton White House, Dole said, "and we ought to face up to" the situation.

Dole used the opportunity to renew his call for Clinton to rule out a pardon for Susan McDougal, who has been convicted in a Whitewater-related case in Arkansas.

Dole said McDougal, a Clinton partner in the Whitewater land development deal, was possibly in a position to "implicate" the president criminally in the complex development deal.

Clinton so avoided a response on the issue that he did not even give the stock "pardon" answer he used in the first presidential debate 10 days ago. At that time, Clinton stopped short of making the promise Dole called for but said he would not give special consideration to any person.

Dole returned to ethics and the FBI files near the end of the debate, recalling that one of the White House employees who requested the files was a bar bouncer who had been put in charge of an administration security office.

"The president has a great responsibility" to guard against such invasions of privacy, Dole said.

With his anticipated reliance on the "character" issue, Dole was looking for a breakthrough in a quickly ending campaign in which his other proposals - including a proposed 15 percent tax cut - have done little to significantly trim Clinton's double-digit lead in the polls.

The debate, even in competition with a National League baseball playoff carried on Fox network, was almost certainly the most-watched event of the campaign and was probably Dole's last chance to sell himself to a large audience of potential voters.

For the final 19 days of the campaign, Dole not only faces the broad-scale question of how to pitch his message to voters nationally but also to carve out the bare minimum of states to provide the 270 electoral votes needed for victory. In addition to his lead in national polling, Clinton also has the powerful presidential stage on which he can play daily and the upper hand in all the most populous - and electorally rich -states except Texas.

Clinton had hoped for a placid exchange with Dole.

"We're not into excitement," White House spokesman Mike McCurry said as Clinton's entourage flew to San Diego from Albuquerque, N.M., where the president prepared for the debate.

In addition to Dole's thrust on Clinton administration ethics, the candidates dueled on economics, federal health-care plans, defense spending, tobacco, homosexual rights, school prayer and several other issues that divide them.

When Clinton questioned Dole's - and the Republicans' - commitment to maintain the security of Medicare, Dole rebuked him.

"There you go again, Mr. President," Dole said. "Let's stop talking about cutting Medicare."

Dole, who at 73 would be the oldest president sworn in to a first term, defended his age as a blessing. Clinton said it was the age of his challenger's ideas - such as his opposition to the original passage of Medicare in the 1960s - that was the problem with Dole.

The last debate was prefaced by an intense discussion within the Dole campaign about how strongly he should challenge Clinton on ethical issues, including pardons for Whitewater felons, the firing of White House travel office employees and the FBI files.

On Tuesday, Dole made what was seen as a warmup assault on Clinton by faulting him on all those issues as well as Democratic acceptance of hundreds of thousands of dollars in donations from Indonesian nationals linked to the president since his days as a young Arkansas politician.

In the debate, Dole worked in only a glancing reference to the Indonesian contributions.

The debate came as a new New York Times national survey showed Americans already view Dole as more combative than Clinton and believe the Republican has been spending more time whittling on the incumbent than explaining his own positions. The poll, conducted Thursday through Sunday, found Clinton with a 17 percentage-point lead over Dole.

The evening was brushed with political history, as it was almost certainly the last national campaign debate for Clinton, and could have been the swan song, after more than 30 years in Washington for Dole, unless there's a dramatic reversal in his political fortunes over the next three weeks.

The final Clinton-Dole faceoff was broadcast nationally from Shiley Auditorium at the University of San Diego, a Roman Catholic school in the border city's rolling hills.

In the only town-hall style debate of the fall campaign, moderator Jim Lehrer, lead newscaster on the Public Broadcasting Service, selected questioners from about 110 people in the audience chosen by the Gallup Organization from registered voters in San Diego County. They were selected because they were uncommitted or weakly aligned with Clinton, Dole or Reform Party nominee Ross Perot.

As in the first debate in Hartford, Conn., 10 days earlier, Perot was excluded at the suggestion of the Commission on Presidential Debates, the nongovernmental body that oversees the high-profile encounters and concluded that Perot has no chance of winning on Nov. 5.

Viewership for the Hartford debate and a running-mate faceoff last week between Vice President Al Gore and former Housing Secretary Jack Kemp, was dramatically off from the debates four years ago.

Dole's plight is highlighted by his campaign travel plans for the next few days. He's headed for states that Republicans have grown accustomed to carrying easily. After stops today in the Republican suburbs of Los Angeles, Dole flies over the next two days through New Mexico, Colorado, Kentucky and Virginia - all states where polling shows Clinton with a lead.

Clinton, by contrast, heads from San Diego today up Interstate 5 to tweak Dole in the GOP base with a rally in Orange County, historically one of the most Republican venues in the nation.
