ST. LOUIS, Mo. – The real Al Gore stood up and let it rip last night – and George W. Bush fired back in the third and final presidential debate.

In their most cantankerous face-off ever, the two foes began squabbling from the word go, as Gore attacked Bush as a yes-man to big guns and big drugs, and Bush tried to paint Gore as a big-spending, big-liberal bickerer.

Gore, back to his old feisty self after last week’s debate in which he seemed to be running so scared he agreed with almost everything Bush said, interrupted repeatedly as he tried to get in the last word.

“There are certain rules we all agreed to, but I guess rules don’t mean anything,” Bush groused at one point.

Gore even seemed to ruffle mild-mannered moderator Jim Lehrer, who snapped at one point: “No, not now,” when Gore tried to rebut a Bush reply.

The debate, a town meeting format in which the audience lobbed the questions, began with a moment of silence for Missouri Gov. Mel Carnahan who was killed Monday night, along with a son and a campaign aide, when his plane crashed in foggy rain.

If Carnahan’s death cast a pall over the room at first, it didn’t take long for Gore and Bush to put on the gloves.

Gore, who got blasted for being stiff and arrogant and fuzzy on the facts in the first debate and too obsequious in the second, drew a line in the sand on the very first question.

Gore accused Bush of opposing a federal law guaranteeing a patient’s right to sue his HMO, claiming the two were in “strict disagreement.”

Bush, denying he opposes such a law, shot back: “Actually, Mr. Vice President, it’s not true.”

Going in to this debate, just three weeks before judgment day, the pair were neck-and-neck, Bush leading by 1 percentage point in the latest Zogby-Reuters tracking poll.

Both presidential wannabes tried to reassure voters on their weaknesses.

“I keep my word,” Gore told the audience.

Bush, who was criticized last week for sounding too gleeful about the death penalty in Texas, insisted “I’m not proud” that his state has executed more people than any other state.

“I’m proud of the fact that we hold people accountable. I’m not proud of the record, sir,” he told one questioner.

The two locked horns on everything from school vouchers to tax cuts to health care to civil rights.

“I’m for it. You heard what I was for,” Bush snapped when Gore suggested he was against affirmative action.

“Are you for it?” Gore persisted.

“I may not be for your version, Mr. Vice President,” Bush shot back – at which point Lehrer interrupted to suggest they “go on to another subject.”

While Gore was deadly serious, Bush stayed low-key, even getting a few laughs from the audience: “When I ran for governor of Texas, a lot of folks didn’t think I could win, including my mother,” he quipped.

Bush vowed to “shoot straight, set aside the partisan differences,” and get things done: “There’s too much bitterness in Washington. There’s too much wrangling.”

“This isn’t about Governor Bush, it’s not about me. It’s about you,” Gore said.

“If you want somebody who believes we were better off eight years ago than you are now and if you want to go back … here is your man,” he added.

Gore advocated a “step-by-step” plan for national health care: “We have a big difference on this and you need to know the record here,” he said as he blasted Bush for heading a state that is “50th out of 50” on health-care coverage.

“I’m absolutely opposed to a national health-care plan. I don’t want the federal government making decisions for consumers,” Bush said.

Gore said he and Bush “have a huge difference between us” on education, and claimed the Texas governor wanted to force vouchers on states.

Bush, looking irked, thanked Lehrer for giving him a chance to answer that attack: “I appreciate that.”

At one point, Gore started to quiz one of the questioners in the audience, asking him: “What grade do you teach?” only to be chastised by Lehrer for breaking the rules.
