TEMPE, Ariz. – President Bush last night slammed rival John Kerry as a far-left liberal who wants to tax America while Kerry shot back at their final debate that Bush has turned his back on America’s “wellness.”

“Senator, in the mainstream of American politics you sit on the far left bank. Your record is such that Ted Kennedy, your colleague, is the conservative senator from Massachusetts,” zinged Bush.

Kerry retorted that he plans a “pay as you go” approach and suggested that for Bush to talk about balanced budgets is “a little bit like Tony Soprano talking about law and order.”

Bush had his own comeback: “I’ll tell you what pay-go means – pay-go means you pay and he goes ahead and spends.”

Kerry accused Bush of “turning his back on the wellness of America” because 5 million people have lost their health-care coverage. Bush shot back that Kerry’s health plan is a $5 trillion “empty promise” that amounts to “bait and switch.”

Kerry also sought to blame Bush for the shortage of flu vaccine, while Bush shot back that America has to rely on a British company to make vaccines because U.S. firms fear liability lawsuits and back away from making vaccines.

Bush also said he won’t get a flu vaccine because of the shortage and urged everyone else who is young and healthy to skip it this year.

This was the last of three Kerry-Bush debates, and the only one set aside for a discussion of domestic issues.

Kerry trounced Bush in the first debate on Sept. 30 in Miami and turned the race into a dead heat. Before that day, Bush had held a solid lead averaging around 6 percentage points in national polls for all of September after his New York convention.

Last night’s ABC News pre-debate poll had Kerry at 49 percent to President Bush’s 48, a statistical tie but a trend toward Kerry. But the Zogby poll had a tie with Bush coming back and a CBS News poll had Bush narrowly ahead.

The verbal fisticuffs at Arizona State University, moderated by CBS’ Bob Schieffer, were intense but not as hot as their second debate last Friday.

Bush looked more relaxed, relying more on humor, while Kerry at times looked a little irked.

From the start, Bush’s strategy was to paint Kerry as an out-of-the-mainstream liberal, while Kerry’s goal was to blame Bush for whatever isn’t going right in America as they head into the final stretch.

When Kerry argued that Bush hasn’t spent enough money on education, Bush shot back: “Only a liberal senator from Massachusetts would say that a 49 percent increase in funding for education is not enough.”

Kerry – like running mate John Edwards in his debate – tried to use Vice President Dick Cheney’s gay daughter as a talking point about gay marriage, saying, “If you were to talk to Dick Cheney’s daughter,” she’d say being gay is “not a choice.”

Bush said “I don’t know” if being gay is a choice, adding that gays should be treated “with tolerance,” but “as we respect someone’s rights, we shouldn’t change or have to change our basic view on the sanctity of marriage.”

On abortion, Kerry said: “I believe that choice is a woman’s choice between a woman, God and her doctor” – and indicated he won’t back Supreme Court justices who’d oppose abortion rights.

Asked if he wants the Supreme Court to overturn legalized abortion, Bush said only that he won’t have a “litmus test” – and noted that Kerry opposed a ban on the “brutal practice” of partial-birth abortion.

As he often has before, Kerry sought to portray himself as an ally of popular Republican Sen. John McCain (Ariz.), who sat in the audience and backs Bush. But for the first time, Bush called him on it.

“John McCain is for me for president and he understands that I have the right plan for winning the war on terror,” Bush retorted – contending that Kerry’s plan spells “retreat.”

Bush focused hard on Kerry’s record in the Senate and portrayed Kerry as a do-nothing senator who’d passed just five bills in over 20 years, prompting Kerry to claim he’d passed 56. Bush aides called that an “utter falsehood.”
