EAST LANSING, Mich. -- In the final debate of the presidential campaign, the three major contenders clashed sharply but civilly Monday night about the lackluster economy at the heart of the national election two weeks from today.

In his most valiant effort of the three nationally televised encounters, President Bush sought to paint front-runner Bill Clinton as an untrustworthy spendthrift who, despite the Democrat's pledges, cannot wait to load more taxes on the middle class.

Clinton, sticking to the "change" message central to his campaign, insisted he would move to revitalize the economy in his first 100 days and asked for an electoral mandate to show Congress that the nation is seriously behind him.

Independent candidate Ross Perot -- who buttressed Clinton on several points -- including the issue of character -- said neither the Democratic nor Republican plan was sufficiently strong medicine for the nation's fiscal ills. The Dallas billionaire insisted a vote for him would not be wasted.

But by the end of the 90-minute joint appearance at Michigan State University, the outline of the race did not seem fundamentally changed, leaving Bush a major uphill climb if he is to win re-election.

An ABC poll taken immediately after the debate indicated that Clinton had scored well. The survey indicated that 36 percent of the viewers thought the Democrat won the face-off, to 26 percent for Perot and 21 percent for Bush. The poll's margin of error was 5.5 percentage points.

The series of debates ended against a backdrop of worsening national poll numbers for Bush.

The latest Cable News Network-USA Today national survey, the first to be completely conducted since the second presidential debate, showed Bush's support at 30 percent, his lowest ever in the sampling, and 18 percentage points behind Clinton's 48 percent. Perot was at 15 percent.

A margin of that magnitude on Election Day would translate into a landslide of possibly historic proportions for Clinton in popular votes and an overwhelming electoral-vote victory as well. In no election since polling became an established and generally reliable predictor of the national outcome has a candidate recovered from a deficit such as Bush faces so late in a campaign.

Bush repeatedly warned that Clinton's promise to increase the taxes only of families with annual incomes of $200,000 or more was false and that it would take a broader revenue increase to pay for new government programs proposed by the Democrat.

"Mr. and Mrs. America, when you hear him say we're going to tax only the rich, watch your wallet because his figures don't add up," Bush said.

Later in the debate, Clinton repeated his $200,000 promise and mocked the disarray in the Bush campaign over whether James A. Baker III would be chief economic adviser in a second Bush administration.

Clinton promised to be personally responsible for economic policy if he wins.

"That's what worries me," Bush shot back. "He would do for the United States what he did for Arkansas . . . We do not want to be the lowest of the low."

Clinton jumped in with a defense of the poor state where he has been governor for 10 of the last 12 years. He ticked off statistics which pointed to growth in Arkansas even as the nation's economy has seemed to lose its way.

"The difference between Arkansas and the United States is that we're going in the right direction and this country's going in the wrong direction," Clinton said.

Perot, a native of Texarkana, noted he grew up five blocks from Arkansas and argued that Clinton's experience as governor of the small state was "irrelevant" to what kind of a president Clinton might make.

He greeted the economic back and forth between the two major-party candidates with virtual contempt throughout the evening, finally exclaiming: "They both have plans that will not work."

Perot's most notable role in the final debate was to attack Bush on a number of issues, especially the incumbent's handling of President Saddam Hussein of Iraq.

Perot, without offering direct evidence, said the Bush administration had told Saddam that he could "take" the northern part of Kuwait, suggesting the alleged move emboldened the Iraqi leader to occupy all of the tiny emirate.

"That is absolutely absurd," Bush said.

Perot said if it was so unbelievable that Bush should order the release of formal instructions the administration gave then-Ambassador April Glaspie before she met with Saddam shortly before his forces invaded Kuwait.

Clinton said there was no evidence of Perot's allegations, but after crediting Bush with leadership in the Persian Gulf War he accused the Republican administration of unnecessarily "coddling" Saddam.

In his closing statement, Perot focused on the issue of whether he can win -- "absolutely" -- and could be an effective president.

"You bet your hat we can govern," Perot insisted, claiming that his election would shake up the political system from top to bottom.

Clinton was ready for Bush's attempt to link him to the Democrats on Capitol Hill, claiming: "It's hard to out-spend Congress, but (Bush) tried to for the last three years."

Although Election Day is close, Bush's attack on Clinton's stewardship as governor of Arkansas was his most focused of the entire campaign.

"You haven't heard me mention this before," Bush said, "but we're getting close now, and I think it's about time I start putting things in perspective. . . . It's not dirty campaigning because he's been talking about my record for a half a year here. . .

"Admit it," Bush urged Clinton, "that Arkansas is doing very, very badly against any standard -- environment, support for police officers, whatever it is."

Clinton, of course, would do no such thing.

"Mr. Bush's Bureau of Labor Statistics says that Arkansas ranks first in the country in the growth of new jobs this year," Clinton shot back.

"This year," Bush interjected.

"Fourth in manufacturing jobs, fourth in the reduction of poverty, fourth in income increase . . . " Clinton went on. "We're low spending, low tax burden. . . . I wish America had that kind of record."

Bush also sought to paint Clinton as wishy-washy, especially on whether the governor supports the North American Free Trade Agreement, which Perot condemned and Clinton has said needs to be amended.

Clinton responded strongly, reminding Bush of his past equivocations and flip-flops, notably that Bush had once referred to the Reagan fiscal program, on which Republicans have run for 12 years, as "voodoo economics."

The final debate was divided into two 45-minute segments. In the first section, Jim Lehrer, the Public Broadcasting Service news anchor, was the sole questioner. In the second, he was joined by three journalists.

Helen Thomas, a veteran White House reporter, pressed Clinton on the issue of his avoiding the draft during the Vietnam War, and inquired whether Clinton could in good conscience ask Americans to fight in any war.

Clinton, without disclosing any more details of his draft record, said he had opposed the Vietnam war, "and I couldn't help that."

But as to sending soldiers into war, Clinton said: "I could do that. I wouldn't relish doing it, but I wouldn't shrink from it."

Bush called on Clinton to release all the papers relating to his draft maneuvering as the Democrat has promised to do in April.

"They have not been forthcoming," Bush said.

Perot basically sided with Clinton on the point: "I look on this as history."
