RICHMOND, Va. -- In a gentle debate that resembled a television talk show, the three presidential candidates Thursday covered a wide range of topics including the deficit, health care and free trade.

Despite predictions that President Bush, trailing in the polls, would step up his attacks on Democratic candidate Bill Clinton, the Republican incumbent's jabs were relatively light and aimed at Clinton's trustworthiness.

"You can't turn the White House into the Waffle House," Bush said, alleging Clinton wanted to be all things to all people.

Perhaps Bush planned some heavier blows, but as soon as the president turned to character, he was called up short by a questioner in the audience at the University of Richmond who asked the contenders to discuss "our needs . . . not yours."

"Can we focus on the issues and not the personalities and the mud?" the questioner asked.

"I agree with him," Clinton said.

Bush clearly felt character was an issue but sensed he would make no points by bearing down and did not return to the point.

Independent candidate Ross Perot, who delighted television audiences in the first debate Sunday with his folksy humor and direct style, continued to hold his own with the more experienced politicians.

During a discussion of the national deficit, Perot asked if the Republicans or Democrats did not run up the $4 trillion national shortfall, "Who did it?"

"Somewhere out there, there's an extraterrestrial doing this to us, I guess," Perot said.

The 90-minute debate came hours after one new national poll showed Bush at his lowest point of the year against Clinton, but another major survey showed the margin between the two major-party candidates narrowing.

The latest Cable News Network-USA Today survey, a sampling conducted completely since the Sunday debate, found Clinton leading with 47 percent, Bush 32 percent and Perot 15 percent. Clinton's 15-point margin over Bush is a slightly larger than last week.

In an ABC News survey conducted Tuesday and Wednesday, Clinton led Bush 44 percent to 37 percent -- a seven-point spread vs. the 12-point Clinton lead in the same survey last week.

"There's only one conclusion you can draw," said Torie Clarke, Bush campaign spokeswoman. "There's still a lot of volatility in this race. . . . On both sides (support) is quite soft."

Dee Dee Myers, Clinton's press secretary, said the ABC poll ran counter to other public surveys as well as the campaign's internal surveys.

The second presidential debate was the first time the contenders had faced a single moderator and questions from an audience. In all other presidential debates over the last 32 years, questions were from a moderator and panel of journalists.

To get the questioners, the Gallup Organization chose 209 people from the Richmond area whom a commission on presidential debates official described as uncommitted or "soft" in their support of a candidate.

Moderator Carole Simpson, a veteran ABC newswoman, asked audience members, sitting close to the candidates, to ask questions.

To many of the questions posed by the audience, the candidates offered responses that had been stock answers on the campaign trail.

In response to question about trade and exportation of jobs to foreign nations, Bush defended the North American Free Trade Agreement -- which eases trade with Mexico and Canada -- as the best way increase jobs in the United States.

But Perot criticized trade policies that allow U.S. companies to move jobs to other nations. He warned that such trade policies will result "in a great sucking sound going south."

On gun control, Clinton repeated his support of the Brady Bill, which calls for a seven-day waiting period before purchasing a gun, while Bush re-emphasized his opposition to any gun control.

Bush stated his support for term limits for Congress, while Clinton said campaign finance reform, not term limits, was the best way to inject new blood into Congress.

In response to the question on term limits, Perot pledged to serve one term and forgo the $200,000 presidential salary.

Bush touted his proposal on enterprise zones in response to a query on how he would solve problems of the inner city. However, Clinton noted Bush's threat to veto a bill before him that includes money for enterprise zone because it includes a tax increase on wealthier citizens.

"That's not mudslinging. That's fact-slinging," said Clinton.

Clinton refused to take a pledge that he would not run for a second term if he did not reduce the deficit by a certain amount, because he said cutting the deficit too quickly would force too much pain on the public in terms of taxes and cuts in government spending.

In response to a suggestion by moderator Simpson that his solutions were simplistic in the highly partisan world of Washington, Perot insisted he would be able to talk with committee chairmen in Congress and get bills passed.

Perot also plugged his 30-minute television commercials throughout the debate.

Clinton's campaign expected what the Arkansan's longtime aide Bruce Lindsey called "slash and burn" from Bush, who lacked much spark in the first debate Sunday night in St. Louis.

Clinton was also subdued on Sunday, knowing that his major goal was to keep from making a mistake that could cost him his lead in all national polls.

Perot, who also had little to lose, was generally perceived as the victor of the first encounter because of his serious, authoritative performance that was laced with humor and self-deprecation.

What, if any, momentum Perot gained from the first debate, however, was probably dulled by the less than assured showing of his running mate, retired Navy Adm. James Stockdale, in the vice presidential debate in Atlanta on Tuesday.

The Bush campaign had initially resisted the open format with audience questions. They felt it was not "presidential" enough and could put Bush, who is not good with recalling figures, at a disadvantage to Clinton.

The Democrat was ecstatic with the format.

"This one belongs to the people," he declared earlier Thursday.

Perot, who can give a rhetorical riff on almost any topic, had complained that the strict question-response format used in the first debate was too limiting.

The third and final presidential debate of the campaign will come Monday night at Michigan State University in East Lansing.
