ST. LOUIS -- President Bush used the first presidential debate Sunday to again attack Bill Clinton's participation in anti-war demonstrations overseas. The Democratic nominee slapped back by suggesting the president's late father would have been ashamed of the ploy.

The issue of Clinton's involvement in Vietnam protests in Europe more than 20 years ago provided the most heated moment in the 90-minute debate, just as Bush, trailing badly in national polls, has attempted to make it the focus of his challenge to Clinton's character over the last week.

National surveys indicate Bush's assault on Clinton's judgment or patriotism is not a popular tack, and even some of Bush's staunchest supporters refused to predict that the opening debate would drive up the president's lagging standing in the three weeks before the Nov. 3 national election.

If Bush was looking for the renewed attack to provide the knock-out blow that analysts said the president needed, it did not initially seem disabling for Clinton.

Throughout the nationally televised encounter, independent candidate Ross Perot turned in a serious, well-informed performance that impressed both the Democratic and Republican campaigns. Neither, however, was certain if it would alter the basic shape of the race.

Clinton sought, as expected, to keep the debate turned toward the faltering economy -- the seed of Bush's unpopularity -- and picture himself as the "real hope for change" from both the Republicans' "trickle-down economics" and more liberal Democrats' "tax and spend" approach.

In the opening moments of the meeting at Washington University, Clinton turned toward Bush and said: "Mr. Bush, for 12 years you've had it your way. You've had your chance, and it didn't work. It's time to change."

Bush repeatedly said he would seek to align himself with the bumper crop of new members of the House and Senate next January to press his plans to reawaken the economy.

The president also said he would ask James A. Baker III, the former secretary of State and now his White House chief of staff, to become the "economic coordinator" of a second Bush administration.

Bush introduced the Vietnam protest issue when debate moderator Jim Lehrer, the public television news host, asked the president whether important "issues of character" separated him from Clinton or Perot.

Bush set the stage by noting his reference to Clinton's anti-war activity had been likened to the wild anti-Communist attacks of Sen. Joseph McCarthy, the Wisconsin Republican, in the 1950s, but he repeated his view.

"I think it's wrong to demonstrate against your own country or organize demonstrations against your own country in foreign soil," Bush said. "I just find it impossible to understand how an American can demonstrate against his own country in a foreign land, organizing demonstrations against it, when young men are held prisoner in Hanoi or kids out of the ghetto were drafted."

Clinton has conceded participating in a demonstration outside the U.S. Embassy in London in the late 1960s while he was a Rhodes Scholar at Oxford University. Bush aides -- and even some Clinton supporters -- have indicated the Democratic nominee helped organize that rally and subsequently participated in a protest in Norway.

Bush said it might have been a "youthful indiscretion," but said Clinton "has not admitted a mistake." Bush suggested that because of his opposition to the Vietnam War, Clinton would lack the moral authority to send U.S. troops into battle as commander in chief.

"You have questioned my patriotism," a stern Clinton responded. "But when Joe McCarthy went around this country attacking people's patriotism, he was wrong. And a senator from Connecticut stood up to him named Prescott Bush. Your father was right to stand up to Joe McCarthy. You were wrong to attack my patriotism. I was opposed to the war, but I love my country."

Bush often cites his father as his role model, and Clinton's invocation of the elder Bush, who is deceased, was a deft stroke.

Bush advisers, however, sought after the debate to paint Clinton's response as "irrelevant." Fred Malek, Bush's campaign manager, said, "It was a clever politician's attempt to evade a tough question."

Clinton's advisers, not unexpectedly, took an opposite view.

"That was a slam dunk on the patriotism question," declared David Wilhelm, Clinton's campaign manager.

The debate was the first of three that the candidates will hold over nine days.
