WINSTON-SALEM, N.C. – It started as a lovefest and ended in a slugfest as George W. Bush again accused Al Gore of “exaggeration” and Gore promised to try not to do it again.

“I got some of the details wrong last week and some of the examples and I’m sorry about that and I’m going to try to do better,” Gore said at the end of last night’s second face-off.

“I can’t promise that I will never get another detail wrong. I can promise you … I will do my best, if I’m elected president, to get the big things right,” Gore said when grilled by moderator Jim Lehrer on his fibs and flubs at last week’s first debate in Boston.

But an irritated Bush refused to accept Gore’s apology, and accused the veep of a longtime habit of stretching the truth.

“This isn’t something new,” Bush said, citing a 1988 memo sent to Gore warning him not to tell any little white lies.

Bush accused Gore of continuing to distort his tax-cut plan last night.

When asked if all is forgiven, he declared, “That’s going to be up to the people, isn’t it?”

“We all make mistakes. I’ve been known to mangle a syllable or two myself, if you know what I mean,” Bush said, deliberately mispronouncing “syllable.”

But he quickly stressed that “credibility’s important … and yes, I think it’s something people need to consider.”

And Bush made a gaffe of his own – as he defended his view that there was no need for a tougher hate crimes bill in Texas – when he claimed all three white men who dragged black Texan James Byrd to his death have been sentenced to death.

“We can’t enhance the penalty any more than putting those three thugs to death,” Bush said.

In fact, only two got the death penalty.

The 90-minute face-off – with the rivals sitting at the opposite ends of the same curved oak table where their ever-so-genteel running mates debated last Thursday – began with a few laughs and many agreements.

Both men called on PLO Chairman Yasser Arafat to stop the Mideast violence, and both agreed American troops should be used less often to fight other countries’ battles.

Gore called on Arafat to use his power to “halt the acts of violence that have been going on,” while Bush demanded Arafat “pull back.”

“It seems like we’re having a great lovefest tonight,” Bush marveled.

It didn’t last.

The pair quickly clashed, often testily, on everything from hate crimes against blacks, the legal rights of gays, gun control and who’s spending how much on what.

“If he’s trying to allege that I’m a hard-hearted person and I don’t care about children, he’s absolutely wrong,” said a miffed Bush.

“I think he’s a good person … I believe him when he says he has a good heart, but I think it’s about his priorities,” Gore replied.

While Gore demanded federal gun licensing, Bush advocated “tough love” to keep guns out of the hands of kids.

In the high-stakes talkathon, Gore – under fire for fibbing his way through the first debate – buffered many of his statements with careful caveats like “I’m no expert … but” or “You don’t have to take my word for it.”

Bush used the casual, sit-down format to highlight his easy-going style, loudly guffawing at one point when Gore made a self-deprecating joke about his penchant for always wanting to have the last word.

Both in identical dark suits, but Gore in a blue tie and Bush in a red one, the two foes sat as far away from each other as possible.

Gore, who blew a kiss to wife Tipper at the start of last week’s debate, settled for a smile and wave instead.
